----------------
EDITOR NOTE MEASURES OF REST

Yellow leaves dangle from the tall
Linden tree like earrings. This issue’s
production has taken us from summer’s
end and the first show of color
on the trees in Northern Vermont,
through New England’s awesome
display, to the first delicate and daring
days of leaflessness. There is something
particularly fragile yet fierce
about this newly-exposed, though
waning, light
Week before last, during one of the
heaviest weeks of production on this
issue, I took a twenty minute drive
through the back roads of Western
Massachusetts at the peak of autumn
splendor, to a renovated schoolhouse
where two hundred people were
attending a weeklong retreat with a
Tibetan Buddhist Dzogchen teacher. I
was visiting for the morning and had
gotten up especially early to squeeze
in a few hours of work before I left
After the talk I lingered in the field
by the schoolhouse, smelling the wet
hay, the decomposing leaves, watching
a cluster of kittens climb and tumble
all over a stationwagon parked in the
middle of the field. As I strolled to
my car with a friend and her baby, I
felt how time had finally slowed
down, and space opened up—not only
could I see where I was but actually
absorb the nutrition from it
On the drive back to the office, my
heart swelling with the beauty of the
glowing landscape, intoxicated by the
earthy smells, I felt simply glad, relaxed,
open to what was in front of
me, and deeply satisfied, excited. And
then it occurred to me: this is how I
feel when I’m dancing.
Snow falls on the open field. Here,
for you to play, are a few found measures
of rest To play, and to repeat,
as you like.

by Nancy Stark Smith

----------------

Sign of The Times 

After twenty some-odd years of
virtual silence, The New York Times
has brought contact improvisation to
our attention. We think this worthy of
putting on the record What follows are
excerpts from the article named below,
by William Harris, that appeared in The
New York Times, Sunday, June 19,
1994. [Eds.]
His Dance Technique is Rooted
in Chain Reaction (excerpts)
by William Harris
To the average person, the term
contact improvisation means little. But
to a whole generation of choreographers
and dancers, contact improvisation is
akin to the gospel, a training technique
that has had enormous influence on their
approach to movement and dance making.
The technique was invented in 1972
by one of the mythic figures of contemporary
dance, Steve Paxton. Just as
Konstantin Stanislavsky created a system
to help actors build their onstage
characters by searching out the motivation
of each moment, Mr. Paxton devised
a comparably revolutionary way
for dancers to develop movement skills
by asking them to focus on the natural
mechanics of the body. At the age of
55, he is much sought after as a teacher;
he is now teaching at the American
Dance Festival in Durham, N.C.
Contact improvisation is as distinct
as the techniques of Merce Cunningham
or Martha Graham, and like those, it is
taught all over the world by a cadre of
disciples. Elements of contact improvisation
are readily apparent in the work
of a number of modem dance choreographers,
notably Stephen Petronio, Elizabeth
Streb and Susan Marshall.
Described in its simplest fashion,
contact improvisation is the chain reaction
that occurs when, for example, one
dancer’s arm or torso comes into contact
with another dancer’s back. It explores
a sensitivity to touch and celebrates
free-flowing physicality, deft reflexes
and collision. It is movement that exists
only in the moment.
Mr. Petronio vividly remembers a
contact improvisation workshop taught
by Mr. Paxton during his freshmen year
at Hampshire College. “We did basic
partnering things, like learning to share
weight without killing each other,” Mr.
Petronio recalls. “We also did meditative
exercises, which were about letting
go of your muscles—a lot of standing
still...until your muscles got so tired
that you let go of them.... Other
people’s classes were about being told
what to do all the time and getting a
good sweat going. Steve’s was anti-
that. It was not about mimicking steps
but about intuition.”
The principles of contact improvisation
may seem obvious. Yet like so
many developments in contemporary
art, they became obvious only after Mr.
Paxton’s years of experimentation,
repetition and reduction. When successful,
the effect can be playful, sexy
and daredevilish, as dancers tumble
against or roll off one another.
Unlike other dance disciplines,
contact improvisation is not rigidly
codified and continues to evolve. Nor
does one have to be a trained dancer to
master it. “Contact is a way for people
to start dancing,” says the choreographer
Trisha Brown. “It is truly proletarian.”
Although Mr. Paxton pioneered the
technique, he says he does not feel any
proprietary claim to it. “I didn’t really
invent anything,” he says. “I invented
a protocol for teaching it and tried to
make sure it was safe. Contact is essentially
about the same kind of energy
that exists in a handshake—that basic
exchange of information in which each
person is extending his feelings but is
also receiving—and the balance of the
give-and-take of each person’s touch.”
Throughout his career, Mr. Paxton
has been as elusive and free-spirited as
the movement technique he developed.
In 1961, at the age of 20, he joined the
Merce Cunningham troupe and the
following year he was one of the founders
of the Judson Dance Theater, an
informal collective of experimentalists
who redefined the parameters of choreography
by challenging existing rules
about what makes a dance. Mr. Paxton’s
early works, for example, contained
a lot of walking.
“I tried to produce a clean version
of ordinariness on the stage,” he says.
“Out of that reduction came so much
physical information.” A decade later,
he helped form Grand Union, the influential
improvisatory dance troupe. It
was while working with Grand Union
that he began solidifying his ideas about
contact improvisation....
“The whole thing about this technique,”
he continued, “is how to get
things simple enough for the mind to
grasp. When I teach, I’m dealing very
carefully with the helix in the body,
with the hip sockets, with the shoulder
blades, with extending down the length
of the bone.”
Martha Myers, dean of the American
Dance Festival school, believes that
contact improvisation is an essential
component of today’s dance curriculum.
“Contact is as much a bread-and-butter
class as ballet,” she says. “Maybe for
today’s dance it is possibly a more
appropriate class.”
One reason Mr. Paxton agreed to
teach at the festival this year is a certain
indebtedness he feels toward the institution.
It was there, in the late 1950s as
a young gymnast and dance student
from Arizona, that he first encountered
Doris Humphrey, Martha Graham and,
most important, Merce Cunningham.
Mr. Cunningham showed the young
student that movement could be approached
conceptually, free of theatrical
or psychological content.... He left the
Cunningham troupe in 1965 to pursue
his study of pedestrian movement.
After Durham, Mr. Paxton plans to
return to Vermont. There’s planting to
be done. “With any technique,” Mr.
Paxton said, “you’re actually growing a
new body. You have to take care to do
it slowly and properly. Just as there are
rules in horticulture, we have them in
‘humaculture’.”

by William Harris

---------------------------



Improvisation Festival, What's That? 

Over the past year, improvisation
festivals have cropped up on two North
American coasts: The 2nd Annual Improvisation
Festival/NY (New York
City), Seattle Festival of Alternative
Dance and Improvisation (WA), Improv
Festival and Symposium (Vancouver,
B.C.), Engaging the Imagination: A
Festival of Improvisation (San Francisco,
CA), and Taken by Surprise: Improvisation
in Dance and Mind (Berkeley,
CA).
Glancing at these titles, one might
not know that dance was the subject of
celebration, or that the California events
also included theater, music and the
spoken word. All the festivals offered
performances, teaching, and symposia/
discussions. All added out-of-town
artists into their local brew. In fact,
many of the same artists travelled from
coast to coast to participate in these
events. This showed some devotion, for
there was little or no money offered,
perhaps because all but one of these
festivals were first-year ventures. As
reported, the events were well-attended
by an enthusiastic public. Critics were
notably absent.
Something is happening here. All of
these events were initiated and produced
by dancers. What is provoking them?
This phenomenon provokes me. The
following impressions arise both from
my participation in the NY and Vancouver
projects and my experience out in
the field as an improvisational choreographer
and performer for many years.
When I was invited to participate in
the NY “Improvisation Festival” last
December, my first thought was to
decline. Those two words together sent
up a flare. A “festival?” At its worst,
a meat market, a fashion show. The
traditional format invites comparison,
and work is often ungracefully juxtaposed.
The parading of artists in one
door and out the other is particularly
difficult for artists whose work depends
on tuning into a space before performance.
There is simply no time for the
art.
Although the work of certain improvisational
artists (myself included) has
long been presented in international
festivals of dance, it has most often
been framed as exotic or “alternative”
fare. One can well imagine why producers
are wary of booking work that is
“unpredictable” or “unrepeatable” in the
customary way, but this reluctance has
helped keep both audience and press
underexposed to the development of
improvisational dance, and thus at a
loss to appreciate its current sophistication.
So it’s high time for improvisational
dancers themselves to begin a
campaign for education.
I have become accustomed to expect
very little open-minded viewing of my
work by audience and critics alike on
those occasions when my work has
been announced as improvisational,
either in the advance publicity or in the
program The great majority of audience
for dance seems to become instantly
polarized by this labelling—aficionados
expecting “risk” and “spontaneity”
on the one side, traditionalists expecting
“self-indulgence” and “the threat of
participation” on the other. As I see it,
none of these expectations have pertinence
to my own work. In light of this,
I have as often chosen to omit any
reference to improvisation as I have
chosen to include explanation of it. So
far, neither approach has satisfied my
need for my work to be seen freshly—
as dance, not methodology.
A festival could be just the chance
to broaden these expectations. But
where do we start? I turn to the word
“improvisation.” What has it come to
mean? It is currently applied to an
enormous range of approaches, methods,
practices and performances. From
loosely constructed scores for performers
with and/or without “dance” experience
(requiring little rehearsal); to spontaneous
or ad hoc performances by
experienced artists (whose work is
customarily not improvisational) who
take the opportunity to taste a collaboration
or try something out in the zing of
the public eye; to basically set movement
choreography leaving a few choices
to the performers; to highly defined
and rehearsed (sometimes over years)
scores for movement, attention and
interaction; to the participatory, gravity
and touch-focussed score of contact
improvisation, to describe but a few.
Contact improvisation itself brings
up a related quandary. As the only
improvisational dance form to have
arisen from modem dance, and have a
name of its own, Contact’s very appellation
has, in my experience, created a
kind of unconscious moratorium on the
public’s awareness of and openness to
other developments in the field of improvisational
dance over the last 20
years. This has had some frustrating
fall-out, with work as far-ranging as
non-improvisational video art, solo
performance, and duet dances with
virtually no physical contact, being
assumed under its label. This part of
the prevailing confusion takes on absurd
proportions. A festival of improvisation
at this point in time might address this
confusion. A simple acknowledgement
of the ranginess of its subject would be
a good place to start.
In expressing these thoughts to the
NY festival organizers, Julie Carr and
Sondra Loring, I found them in an
exploratory and inclusive frame of
mind. As a result of their openness, I
constructed a way to approach some of
these concerns. I was joined in this
effort by my collaborators in Image
Lab: improvisor/choreographers Karen
Nelson, KJ Holmes, and Scott Smith.
For our project, we set up a series
of “Observatories” in a small theater on
weekday afternoons as part of the festival.
The Observatories opened to the
public our practice of an improvisational
composition score which applies our
improvisational skills to an investigation
of the meaning of movement. It is a
collaborative learning form, both for
ourselves and an audience. It seeks as
much to demystify an improvisational
process as to preserve its mysteries.
We were grateful for its welcome in the
festival, the dialogue it stimulated, and
its seeming relevance to the incredible
variety of participating artists. And it
was a relief for me to translate my
concerns into action.
The 2nd Annual NY Improvisation
Festival was a two-week event, from
November 28 to December 12, 1993. It
succeeded in spawning the 3rd Annual
which will take place November 27 to
December 11, 1994. It also planted a
seed for the Improv Festival and Symposium
in Vancouver, which happened
the first two weeks of August ’94 at the
home base of E.D.A.M. (Experimental
Dance and Music), directed by Peter
Bingham.
Peter had participated in both annual
NY festivals as part of the Contact
Group, an ad hoc collective of experienced
contactors interested in high-level
exchange. With the input of Steve
Paxton, Nancy Stark Smith and myself,
he constructed a residency project for
working improvisational groups to share
time daily in his beautiful studio theater
at the Western Front Lodge. Two
groups participated: a smaller collection
of the Contact Group, renamed Group
6—Peter, Nancy, Chris Aiken, Jeff
Bliss, Julie Carr and Ray Chung; and
Image Lab (which also included Nora
Hajos and Ray). Steve Paxton was
present briefly, and Simone Forti was in
residence to share her dance narrative
approach with members from both
groups. Although the time was incredibly
full, most of us took the opportunity
to visit each other’s work sessions,
share performances, and take each
other’s classes which were offered to
the public each morning. In fact, all of
the work, to varying degrees, was open
to the public. This was a brilliant stab
at a new format for improvising artists—a
working festival.
Immediately following the Vancouver
event, over half the participants
travelled down to Seattle to teach and
perform at the festival there. From
Karen Nelson’s telling, the main organizers,
Heidi Drucker and Robert Harrison,
having been informed about the
Vancouver gathering, had seized the
opportunity to bring these out-of-town
artists into the heart of their festival.
As Karen put it, “It was a great confluence
of travelling dancers and local
artists and a real shot in the arm for the
alternative dance scene in Seattle.”
It is certainly possible that the appearance
of so many festivals for improvisational
dance in one year is coincidental,
as artists in each area respond to
their local conditions. It’s obvious,
however, that the impetus for at least a
couple of these festivals came from the
others. Whatever the case, thanks to
this phenomenon, I’ve been stimulated
to air some prickly questions about
being part of, as well as out in, the
field.

by Lisa Nelson

---------------------------



Taken By Surprise 

Taken By Surprise: Improvisation
in Dance and Mind, a full-day
cross-disciplinary symposium, took
place on June 11, 1994 at the Julia
Morgan Theater in Berkeley, California.
It was presented by the Talking Dance
Project of the Ellen Webb Dance Foundation
and was co-directed by David
Gere (critic/dance historian) and Ellen
Webb (dancer/choreographer). The
event explored the nature of improvisation
in dance, in other art forms, and in
our daily lives.
The day began with visual artist
Mike Henderson painting an 8’x30’
painting on the back wall of the theater.
Then keynote speaker Susan Foster
(Chair and Professor of Dance at University
of California, Riverside) created
a delightful and serious context for the
day as she probed for a manifesto of
improvisation while improvising full-tilt
around the theater, up ladders, out-of-
doors and on top of the podium. The
symposium ended eight hours later with
a ’’moving” debate between Barbara
Dilley (Naropa Institute faculty member)
and Ray Gibbs (Professor of Psychology,
UC Santa Cruz), talking and
dancing about what is happening on the
inside during the improvisational process
and what it’s like to watch. This
conversation evolved into a broad-ranging
improvisation with audience members
joining in on stage.
This was one of those rare symposia
that magically adds up to more than the
sum of its parts. The day included
Indian dance, jazz-tap, musicians, actors,
critics, dance historians, video and
slide presentations. Improvisation
seemed emphatically alive and well and
essential to our lives. As legendary tap
dancer Jimmy Slyde said during his
performance, “What’s the big deal anyway?
I just call this ad libbin’.”

by Ellen Webb

---------------------------

Engaging the Imagination 

As per our initial press notes, our intentions were as follows:
“We are interested in improvisation as a performance and art
form, as a way of thinking and playing, and as a world view.
We believe that within the practice of improvisation lies a key
to another way of being with one another, one that encourages
spontaneity, challenge, discovery, and the expansion of creativity.
We are producing Engaging the Imagination: A Festival of
Improvisation because we are interested in gathering together
artists who have made a commitment to improvisation and the
improviser’s “mind” in their work. We seek to excavate and
render visible the skeleton, bones and muscles of our community
and we want to create a space where the language of improvisation
is spoken both fluently and well. We hope to engage
dialogue about the uses, values and cultural meanings of
improvisation during this festival. Engaging the Imagination will
be a venue where improvisation can be seen, taught and
experienced. The questions of this festival circle around issues
of faith and community: we believe that improvisation itself is
an act of faith, and we are interested in joining with others who
share this view.”


Engaging the Imagination: A
Festival of Improvisation, took place in
the city of San Francisco from May 23
to June 5, 1994. A two-week festival of
performances, classes, jams and public
forums, Engaging was an opportunity
for dancers, musicians, spoken-word and
theatre artists to come together and
share their mutual, and dissimilar,
concerns and practices in improvisation.
The festival focused strongly on performance,
presenting over twenty different
artists in eight nights of performance.
Artists from out of town, including
Deborah Hay, Simone Ford, Jennifer
Monson, Karen Nelson, Scott Smith and
KJ Holmes joined Bay Area artists who
included Ruth Zaporah, Jon Weaver,
Pulp Playhouse, Devorah Major, Maria
St. John, Nao Bustamante, Corey
Fischer and others. We tried to create a
balance of solo, duet, and group performances,
but soloists predominated.
Out of town artists taught classes,
performed and participated in jams and
public forums. Classes were also offered
by Bay Area artists, including a
class in “Authentic Movement for Performance,”
and something called “The
Aesthetics of Intimacy.” Anna Halprin
led a community event attended by over
seventy people. She shared her Earth
Run score with us, and with her usual
grace and skill, taught participants parts
of the RSVP Cycles, her process of
collective creativity. The festival was
produced by Jo Kreiter, Liz Ozol and
myself.
The festival was well-publicized
before the fact, although no critics were
curious enough to come to any of the
performances. All of the events, including
“Skeptics Corner,” an open discussion
about the nature, use and value of
improvised performance, were well-
attended, both by members of the local
dance community and others. Dance
and writing jams were also well-attended.
We received all the grant money
we requested (!) and were able to pay
the artists and ourselves as organizers.
Out of town artists were additionally
supported with money for their travel
expenses. We were pleased to be able
to do that much and wished, as ever,
that we could have done more. Hotel
Tax/ Grants for the Arts, the Anne
Schneider Trust and the Zellerbach
Foundation were our financial supporters.
In addition, support was given by
Footwork Dance Studio (through the
efforts of Wayne Hazard, Michael Jones
and Keith Corollo) and 848 Community
Space, which hosted the first week of
performances, where we were treated to
the usual support, discourse and challenge
we have come to expect from
Keith Hennessy and Jess Curtis.
In organizing the festival, it was our
intention to create a forum where improvisation
could be seen, studied and
practiced. We were not interested in
creating a Contact festival, but rather, a
broader event where improvisation in its
many forms could be experienced. In
addition, we were interested in the
underground structure of the improvisation
community, which our intuition
told us did in fact exist, although our
experience did not fully support our
belief.
In terms of engaging with artists
from different parts of the community,
we hoped that inviting people from
outside our immediate sphere would
facilitate this. All three of the organizers
are white, female, Jewish, post-Jud-
son contact-based dance improvisers
(eclectic, but not diverse), and we wanted
a wider constituency in our presenting.
Like most multicultural agendas
that are created without a sufficient
network to support them, our hope for
engaging with people from outside our
sphere in significant ways was not fully
successful. It is clear that a multicultural
and multimedia agenda must also
have at its heart a multicultural marketing
strategy, which we did not have.
Our assumption that inviting artists from
other communities would necessarily
bring in new audience was fallacious,
and so our audiences, while ample, were
fairly homogeneous. Questions about
producing outside our own sphere, and
our need and desire for this kind of
programming were many.
In addition, I feel we fell short of
the “study and practice” part of our
agenda by focusing too heavily on performance,
and the next Engaging will be
more educational than performative, if I
have anything to do with it. As an
organizer, I felt obliged to attend each
performance, and although each one had
merit, the cumulative effect of eight
performances in two weeks has kept me
out of the theatre for the four months
since the festival ended! Who knows
how long that will last... In its initial
planning stages, Engaging the Imagination
was called Educating the Imagination,
and it was my desire to present
many teachings in improvisation. Due
to the collaborative nature of this project
and different interests on the part of the
organizers, “Educating” became “Engaging”
and education was superceded by
performance. Whether or not this was
a good choice is debatable and certainly
subjective.
Many lessons were learned through
the creation of this festival. Jo and Liz
and I spent many hours hammering out
our differences and learning to work
with one another. In some ways, this
was our biggest learning: how to manage
an event of this size and collaborate
across our differences.
We made some significant mistakes
in the way in which we invited people
to participate. This festival was a product
of our own personal desires, not a
“community event,” and not everyone
was invited to perform. We invited
people whose work was interesting to
us. Although we announced the festival
in the pages of this magazine, and
spread the word as we went along, we
were met with challenges around the
way in which we issued invitations.
There had been an assumption within
the Bay Area improvisation community
that the festival was “theirs” and would
represent everyone’s work. We learned
a good deal, again, about the politics of
inclusion and exclusion.
Next time, I could see producing the
festival by asking for submissions,
rather than relying only on our own
limited exposure as producers. This
would change the scope of the festival,
and would be a big shift in its organization
and purpose. Alternately, we may
need to be more clear about the ways in
which we invite people to participate,
and leam to weather the storms of emotion
that necessarily follow.
I feel that Engaging the Imagination
was a worthy experiment. Friends were
made and old friends met again, and
teaching and learning and dancing and
talking happened. In coordination with
the Talking Dance Project and the
Dance Critics Association events about
improvisation which followed our festival
by one week, a critical mass seems
to have been reached regarding the
presence and importance of improvisation
in our lives. I look forward to
creating more events of this nature and
watching the process continue to unfold.
Any questions, desires to participate,
concerns, etc., you can address to Engaging
the Imagination, 1074 Carolina
Street, San Francisco, CA 97107.

by Rachel Kaplan

---------------------------


WAKING UP movement meditation


Day 1
Lie down on your back on the floor in a quiet place. Close your eyes, taking time to feel
the lids fall back onto the convex curve of the eye, and the sphere of the eyeball drop
back into the concave hollow of the socket. Release the weight of the sockets down onto
the cavities of the skull, all the way down to the hollow valley of the back of the head.
Allow the skull surface to soften and widen across the floor like a sack of sand.
Feel your lips lying along the arch of your teeth. Let your mouth release the importance
of expression, let it become empty and spacious. Feel your tongue soften and widen
into rest inside the cave of the mouth. Allow gravity to release and shift your bottom jaw
down toward the floor, at the same time letting the top jaw unhinge and fall back and
away, settling lightly on its occipital cradle.
Release the skin of your ears and the inner chambers of your hearing into gravity.
Breathe, without changing or shaping the breath. Just noticing. Not thinking about
breathing, just breathing and following the movement of the breath, with a bare, broad,
patient attention. Allow each inbreath and outbreath to fill and then empty the whole
cavern of the skull.
Day 2
Begin by standing or kneeling comfortably, with the spine long and fluid. With the eyes
closed, imagine a sphere of misty light, or a smoky vapor ball forming inside the skull, just
behind the third eye. Slowly move the head, allowing the vapor sphere to float within the
cavern of the skull, moving in and out of the inner surfaces of the face and head. Leading
with the head, curving forward, slowly roll down through the spine, allowing the sphere to
float down the hollow tube of the spine. Roll back up to vertical, floating the sphere to the
level of the shoulders.
Letting the body be moved by the action of the sphere, slowly float it out through the
left arm, all the way to the fingers. Bring it back, and send it slowly and with sensitivity
through the column of the right arm. Now float it multidirectionally within the cavity of
the torso. Continue this process of allowing the body to be moved by the floating sphere,
this time moving it through the legs and the pelvis. Now allow your movement to expand
in all directions, following the unpredictable and subtle flow and shift of the sphere.
Imagine the sphere as an internal shadow partner. Try adding a second sphere, perhaps of
a different color, density or temperature, and “juggle" them internally, always letting the
image carry you into the movement.

Day 3
Sitting in a comfortable, well-balanced position, gently open the eyes, including the third
eye. Allow the eyes to simply absorb what they see, without leaping out to grasp. No
need to name, catalogue and interpret each detail of the visual landscape. Allow your
eyes to receive, the focus to remain soft. Open and close the eyes, practicing this bare
vision, receiving both the light and the dark with equal awareness.
Continue to alternate between opening and closing the eyes, shifting your body's
position randomly and slowly, so that the visual field changes slightly with each opening
and closing of the eyes. Get used to a receptive vision, releasing the natural aggressiveness
and contraction of the eye-mind. Let the eyes become part of the big democracy of
the body's sensual experience, no more important than anything else. Imagine expanding
your inner vision, so that “seeing" becomes a function of all the cells of the body.
Breathe in, breathe out
Day 4
Stand with eyes closed and feet close together, balancing the cups of the sit bones above
the cups of the heels. Breathe into the envelope of the skin, beginning with the surface of
the feet touching the floor, and extending to the soft palate of the crown of the head/ Feel
the whole body as a long, soft column of breath, from floor to ceiling. Imagine the sole of
the foot as a diaphragm, subtly responding to each breath. Feel your skin-body billowing
out with the wind of each inbreath, and settling into stillness with each outbreath.
Now lie down on the floor, and begin to move slowly, riding on this experience Of the
breath, travelling across the skin-map of the body. Experience your breathing as receptive
and flexible; observing the uniqueness of each breath. Explore all the surfaces .of your
body: front, back, sides, top, bottom, listening to the movement of the breath through the
cells, emptying and filling the pores of the skin. Alternate moving and stillness. Pause at
various points in the landscape and allow your awareness to expand.

Day 5

Using a surface that is soft and low (a low massage table, bed or even a pile of pillows),
begin testing the weight of the body. First let an arm or leg hang off the surface, feeling its
internal volume and outer form. Then try allowing all of one side or the other to fall and
lengthen into gravity. Then let the torso hang, first lying face down, then face up, finding a
balance point which permits you to completely release into the hang without experiencing
discomfort. Let the lower body hang, finding ways to support yourself so that the breath
can move freely through the inner cavities of the body. Begin to improvise a duet with this
surface, exploring all the ways in which you can use your bed-partner to suspend, hang,
and lengthen. Be especially awake to the transitions from one position to the next, for
these are the places that hold the most possibility for discovery, where the dance is
unpredictable.
As your body begins to have a deeper sense of length and volume, begin to explore the
differences between an active, reaching stretch, and a passive, hanging one. Explore the
process of going from active to passive and back again. Notice the sensation and the
gradation of tension (a slow steady decrease or increase) when a muscle slowly engages or
releases. Slow down your movement to extend those moments even further, so that the
accumulation or dissipation of muscular engagement becomes even more refined, and you
eliminate any “jumps" or jerks, and are slipping almost imperceptibly from active to
passive. Move just at the threshold of your sensory awareness.
Now activate all the muscles at once, quickly changing position. Then release
completely, but maintain a sense of readiness to move—as if the engine of the body is still
running. Repeat these rapid shifts several times, each time changing position. Notice the
differences that this dramatic speed change brings to your awareness and feeling.

Day 6
Begin by centering your weight on hands and knees, feeling the anchoring connection of
the knees upward into the hip sockets, and hands lengthening to the shoulders. Do not
sag into the position, but be aware of a tensile strength and aliveness in this shape. Feel
the horizontal hollow column of the spine, from its atlanto-occipital cradle at the skull to
the end of the tail.
Slowly rock forward and back between the head and the tail. To further activate the
spine, create a clockwise circling motion with the pelvis which is echoed by a counterclockwise
circling in the head and upper torso. As the head reaches up to the right, the
hips reach back and up to the left. Then head and hips drop through center, head moves
up left, hips moving right, and so on. The head and hips describe circles in the vertical
plane, and the spine circles like a jumprope between the two. Reverse the directions.
Feel the head and tail actively reaching out into the space, seeking the far corners of the
two circles. Add the movement of the eyes, making their reach the primary initiation for
the movement. Now initiate from the coccyx, letting the skull and eyes be pulled by the
reach of the tail.
Come back to center and fold the hips back and down, letting the sit bones rest on the
heels and the forehead on the floor. Breathe through the hollow column spine, then slide
the hips laterally to the right or left to roll onto your back, lengthening and widening out
through the arms and legs into an “X" position. Enjoy the residue of the movement in your
skin, your muscles, your bones.

Day 7
Lie comfortably on one side, noticing all of the asymmetries, internal and external, of this
position. Beginning with any two points in the body, for example, the tail and the concave
socket of the closed right eye, start a slow-moving conversation between these two points.
Letting yourself be moved by this dialogue, explore all the possible elements of conversing:
question and answer, silence, listening, simultaneous speaking, leading and following.
Rather than sinking heavily into gravity, feel the floor as an active partner, and move
towards and away from it with a sense of dynamic tension between up and down,
observing the interaction of the body's surfaces with the floor surface. Include the whole
body, so that echoes of the principal conversation are “heard" throughout the body's
interior spaces. Allow the inner and outer “landscape" of the body to be transformed by
this dialogue, letting go of ideas about how your body looks, how your body usually
moves. Play with time, moving at the speed of grass growing, the speed of a star falling.
Observe the stream of images and sensations that arise as you move. Let yourself be
changed. Generously allow the body to wander, to lose its orientation, while the attention
remains clear and focused. Let the body decide.

by Paula Josa-Jones

----------------

IMPROVISATIONS IN WAR a concert tour in Croatia and Serbia
by Ruth Zaporah

My friends, social activists Tova
Green and Fran Peavy had been to the
former Yugoslavia, specifically Croatia
and Serbia, several times since the war
began, each time bringing gifts and
medical supplies that they had gathered
from American women. They
made many friends on these trips,
particularly members of local women's
organizations working against the war
and supplying aid to refugees. While
there, they asked their friends what
they would like them to bring on their
next visit. To their surprise the response
was: culture—art and performance.
Hence, they invited me and
seven other women to join them in
June 1994 on a three-week tour, offering
performances and workshops
throughout the war-tom country.
The conditions of the world, at least
as depicted by The New York Times
every morning generally had me overwhelmed.
Customarily I've maintained
a vague removal from international
misery, probably as a way of protecting
myself from my own sense of helplessness
and rage. But events seemed to
be mounting and my guard, thinning.
I was pausing more while reading,
projecting myself into the stories, identifying
with the victims and trying to
find myself in the persecutors. So
when Fran called, there wasn't a
missed beat between her invitation and
my response. Yes, absolutely yes and
thank you, thank you.
There were ten of us on the June
'94 "Honoring Loss/Celebrating Life"
concert tour. Four performers: myself;
Rhiannon, a jazz vocalist; Barbara Bor-
don, a percussionist; and Naomi Newman,
an actress with the Travelling
Jewish Theater. Two Muslim women
from Malasia: Norma Nordin, a lighting
designer and theater director; and
Zuriah Aljeffri, a painter. Penny
Rosenwasser, a stage manager and
community activist; Franceska Schifrin,
a painter; and Fran and Tova, the organizers.
We called ourselves "Doves."
We were Jews, Christians, Muslims and
Buddhists. We were happy with that
model and felt it appropriate, since we
were heading into a war zone fueled
by extreme nationalism.
Our itinerary included Zagreb,
Split, and Dubrovnik in Croatia, and
Belgrade and Novi-Sad in Serbia, plus
a total of nine refugee camps that surrounded
these cities. The plan was to
do performances in theaters in the
cities and workshops/performances in
the camps. Fran and Tova had made
all the arrangements on their previous
visit
Even though I trusted Fran and
Tova's judgment in including my work
on the bill, I experienced a subtle anxiety
about it Both the performances
and the trainings that I do draw forth
content that is somewhat unpredictable
and possibly dark. This seems to suit
the tastes of educated American or
European audiences and students. I
didn't know about the Balkan countries—who
we'd run into there, whether
this work would translate.
I improvise performances. Performing
both as actor and dancer, I
weave images through movement,
language and vocalization. I enter the
stage with no pre-arranged concepts. I
create pieces by beginning with a spontaneous
action. I then build a scenario
step by step until content is realized.
Within that process, I introduce characters,
events and situations that reflect
the mingling of imagination and personal
experience. The pieces are
dreamlike, landscapes grounded in
humor and pathos.
My Action Theater trainings investigate
and exercise various physical
and mental processes of awareness.
Students look deeply at their perceptions,
behaviors and the possibilities
for skillful change.
In the weeks preceding the trip,
three fears loomed larger and larger in
my fantasies: (1) being captured and
tortured by the Enemy; (2) doing movement
with women refugees, inadvertently
opening them to deep pain and,
then, abruptly leaving without having
time to mend; (3) finding my improvi-
sational work irrelevant and inappropriate
for a war-tom audience. I didn't
want to bring what I anticipated as my
own despair and rage into their already
pressing lives nor did I want my
horror, dismay, and revulsion to
shroud what I could otherwise offer
them.
The first fear turned out to be unfounded.
I was never in physical danger
in either Croatia or Serbia, or, if I
was, I didn't know it. Yes, there were
some tense moments. When our train
passed across the Serbian border, the
passport control officials were nasty
and insulting and when we stood with
the Women in Black* in a main plaza
in Belgrade holding up peace placards
on a Wednesday afternoon, there were
groups of military watching our every
move, and the lobby of our modest
hotel in Belgrade seemed to be full of
lurking shady characters with their
eyes steadily on us. Otherwise, as we
travelled from city to city we travelled
from hand to hand, graciously and
fastidiously hosted by local women's
organizations. Everything was tidily
arranged. Even the State Department
and the United Nations knew of our
whereabouts. For the most part, I felt,
at least physically, safe.
In Zagreb, the first war city on our
itinerary, it became clear that this tour
would require two different kinds of
performances. One for the refugee
camps and the other for the city theaters,
which drew general audiences. In
the camps, we needed to work nonverbally,
and when we did speak it
was with the aid of translators. In the
cities, the people were somewhat educated
in English, generally more cultured.
Language, simply stated,
worked.
Every camp was different and our
visits, unfortunately, were short, three
to four hours. We'd usually arrive by
bus and then be offered a tour. We'd
always decline, preferring to go directly
to where we'd be working. We
didn't come to observe or gawk. We
came to offer our talents, meet people
and listen. Each camp required a few
moments of scoping out. On the Dal-
mation Coast, once a resort area, the
refugees were housed in damaged
hotels. There was a sense of calm,
orderliness. People were nicely
dressed, the children settled, contained.
In contrast, in the sprawling camps
outside the cities of Split and Belgrade
there was commotion, disarray, the
children chaotic. Some of the camps
were mostly women and children,
others mixed, with men and boys. The
ambiance would cue us as to how to
proceed with an appropriate presentation.
We aimed to be simple and
friendly. For example, at a children's
hospital I found myself singing and
dancing "You Put Your Right Foot
In..." and "Old MacDonald Had a
Farm," a far cry from my practiced
haute-art fare.
My second fear also didn't apply.
Teaching anything turned about to be
inappropriate. What was fitting was
playful performing and interactive
activity. For example, I danced with a
harmonica in my mouth, a language
everybody understood. Seeing a mid-
dle-aged woman prandng around with
a harmonica clenched between her
teeth seemed to tickle everyone and, at
least for those moments, distract them
from their boredom, apathy and despair.
I drew those who were willing
out onto the floor and we danced to
the harmonica together. There were
always some people unwilling to
dance, dressed in black, obviously in
mourning. But even they couldn't
resist a smile, as delight and laughter
arose.
Even though I had found, with the
harmonica, a mode that translated, it
took me a few camp experiences to
truly find myself in the task. At first, I
was tense, off balance, focusing too
much on the audience and how I was
affecting them and what I wanted from
them—to make them feel better, be
relieved, forget war. But as I looked
into their faces, felt their warmth, hugs
and smiles, and heard their heart-
wrenching stories, I stopped objectifying
them. In a sense I let go of them
and took hold of myself. I travelled
inward, locating the deepest, strangest
self, the self I love to play with.
The city performances were, in a
sense, a bigger challenge. In each
show, I improvised three pieces, the
first being a dance with either Rhian-
non singing and playing the piano, or
with Barbara drumming. I hadn't
performed just dance in many years,
my interest having been overtaken by
intrinsically connected language and
movement But here, in this setting, I
longed for silence, for my body to
move with and through the horrendous
experiences that I was witnessing.
Dance came forward and moved itself,
one feeling transforming into another,
horror to humor, shame to power.
Every dance was different and I met
myself each time.
The second improvisation was the
harmonica dance, light and playful. I
was usually up for it, having cleared
myself and paved the inner route with
the previous dance.
It was the third improvisation,
which included the indelible concreteness
of language, that was the crucible.
It presented a challenge I couldn't
ignore, not after all these years of practicing.
Split was the first "war" city we
performed in. I was tense. I was programmed
to follow a slide show of
Franceska's powerful Sarajevo war
paintings accompanied by Barbara
drumming. I watched this event from
backstage and experienced myself
shifting into a dark and somber place.
I entered the stage denying these feelings,
again, as in the camps, trying to
entertain, change the energy, lift the
spirit. Maybe I did. However, the
experience wasn't satisfying. I worked
too hard, didn't relax, didn't transcend
myself.
It wasn't until Dubrovnik that I
dropped into myself. We were there a
week, got to know people, made
friends, felt the city, took up life there.
This exquisite city had been under
attack for fifteen months. Our new
friends had lived through that and had
had loved ones die. They were fierce,
dedicated, steamy, sophisticated and
very warm people. The refugees we
met in the camps nearby shared the
same fire and light. We laughed,
shared stories, gifts and clothes and
argued about the war. We were glad
to know each other.
War was taking place ten kilometers
away and yet these people were
living their lives as normally as possible.
I was in awe of their strength and
my improvisations reflected that. Their
power inspired my power, their grandness,
mine. The content of the pieces
shifted to themes of hopefulness, endurance,
adaptability, and perseverance.
I reflected their experience and
was grateful for the inspiration.
Belgrade and Novi-Sad in Serbia
offered yet another challenge. We
didn't know who our audience would
be, whether we would be aligned politically
or not. I didn't know how direct
my material should be. Whether I
should say what I thought about their
military history and current violent
abuses.
Again, this mental bantering was
irrelevant. We stayed in Belgrade a
week. Yes, it was difficult The city,
the air, the faces, had a gloomy resignation.
There was little food. Americans
were hated. The general citizenry
was uninformed, indignant, nationalistic.
In the refugee camps we heard
chilling stories about genocide, rape,
mutilation, etc similar to those we
heard in Croatia. Yet, in these camps
too, there were smiles, hugs, playfulness,
gifts and loving gestures.
Our hosts in this aggressive, male-
dominated culture, were wonderful,
brave, dedicated women, who put
themselves on the line daily by speaking
out against their government's
activities. The people who came to our
performance knew that we were invited
by these peace groups. I assumed
they were either politically aligned or
government spies. The room was
packed: energy—powerful, temperature—smotheringly
hot, air—dankly
humid. I improvised my heart out,
danced with all the passion I could
muster, "harmonica-ed" my breath
away, and, finally, spoke of accommodation:
In the valley there lived a group of
people. They stayed ■very dose
together all the time. Breathed
together. In and out. You could
always hear their collective breath
no matter where you were. One
day one of them noticed a light
coming from another valley. During
the night that person left.
With the dawn, there was a noticing.
Breath stopped. Silence. But
then a baby gasped for air. And
another, and another. And soon
everyone adjusted themselves to
the change and was breathing
again. Sometime later, another
person disappeared. Again breath
stopped. Again accommodation.
Again breath. And this happened
again and again until the only
thing the valley people knew how
to do was to accommodate.
The reception was fantastic, overwhelming,
both to my piece and the
whole evening. A lot of gratitude that
we seemed to understand their situation,
grateful that we related directly to
their experience without preaching, sermonizing,
condescending, or over-sympathizing.
In Novi-Sad, we were hosted and
sponsored by the local office of an
international peace and development
organization, Soros. A young woman
who directs their cultural events met
us. She described an event of the previous
week. A multi-national theater
festival had drawn a large audience.
The local television station showed up,
presumably to film the event for broadcast
After focusing for five minutes on
the production, the camera shifted to
record the faces of everyone in the
audience. (This is a government-run
station.) This obviously created a very
tense situation. Consequently, she
didn't expect many people to turn out
for our event. And she was right
Only seventeen people came. Yet, I felt
graced by their presence, their willingness
to risk comfort and maybe even
freedom. The improvisations reflected
back their commitment to peace.
Throughout the tour, I maintained
composure. (I think having raised four
children prepared me for anything.) I
functioned clearly and fairly unemotionally.
But when I got home, I
dropped into a state of depression and
despair that I've never known. I couldn't
find a way to hold my life here in
California with what I knew of the
suffering and cruelty that was going on
over there. I lost all semblance of hope
for any of us. It seemed justified that
we're ruining the planet and creating
our own demise.
A week after I returned, still wrestling
with the upheaval, I left for a two-
week residency at the Naropa Institute
in Colorado. Groups of people would
come together as they did at home
(family and friends) and want to hear
about the tour. What was war like?
What did you see? I made several
attempts at recounting the experience
and each time it felt wrong, a severe
diminishment. The experience was not
limited to the facts of "this happened
and then this happened." It was only
when I was on a panel about improvisation
with Nancy Stark Smith and
Rachel Rosenthal, that I, inadvertently,
found my voice. Rachel used the word
"sacred." That word blew me open.
How did sacred apply to war? Finally,
the accounting poured out of me with
the passion with which it originally
entered. I learned that I had to be
moved to speak.
The following week I performed an
improvisation for the Naropa community.
I knew that I wanted to make
work about what I had experienced
but I didn't have any idea how that
would happen. I entered the space
garbling language, and garbled and
garbled, travelling back to Croatia,
Serbia, the Slavic people, my hotel
rooms, the young boys going off to
fight, murder, torture, crying women,
angry women, mutilated men and
women, my travelling mates, my loss
of hope. In performance, I felt myself
again, and heard myself telling myself
what the trip meant to me.
The tour was a great lesson about
the fullness of life. I touched the aspect
of war that's about people struggling
to smooth out their existence in
the face of miserable onslaught. I
learned that underneath despicable
pain and despair, the heart beats, loves
and, given a moment's breath, hopes.

----------------


MAPPING DANCING learning from children
by Kate Tarlow Morgan

I am thinking of Paul Valery's
essay on "Aesthetics"1 in which he
talks about the existence of three
bodies.
The MY BODY is "a thing that
belongs to us"— arm that waves, leg
that walks, head that nods—or it is a
thing that we belong to—a headache,
a wave of passion. The My Body
occupies a "strange, asymmetrical
space." My Body exists only in the
present; its universe is made up of
immediate moments.
Then, there is SECOND BODY.
The one that others see; the one that
confronts us in the mirror. The Second
Body has form, that which is
donned with armor, clothes, tattoos,
hats, jewels. The Second Body
moves in the Outside World, the
visual world, as a surface; its universe
is made up of images.
THIRD BODY, or the inside, can
only be perceived in pieces. It is the
science of fluids, sponges, vessels,
tubes, fingers, articulated rods, tissue,
corpuscular shapes. Third Body
is our dissection/inspection; its universe
is the microscopic.
According to Valery, however,
these three bodies are not sufficient
in relaying the full body experience,
and therefore he names a FOURTH
BODY "...which I might call the Real
Body or equally well the Imaginary
Body." The Fourth Body derives
from the properties and events of the
other Three Bodies and makes the
unknown known. It "pulverizes,
mixes and rearranges." It makes
sense out of nonsense and it creates.
The universe of the Fourth Body is
the universe of creation.
I had been stuck for some time.
Almost three years, no dance. I
would go to the studio twice a week
to contact my Fourth Body. I turned
out the lights; I painted; I wrote; I
slept; I cried—no dance. Then it was
Autumn again. Time to go back to
teaching creative movement to children.
What was I going to teach, if I
couldn't move?
I teach RhythmsR to children
(ages 3 to 9) at Stevens Cooperative
School in Hoboken, New Jersey.
RhythmsR, founded by Ms. Ruth
Doing in the 1920s, is a form of
physical education that has links to
the international physical culture
movement of the late nineteenth
century—involving people such as
Francois Delsarte, Leo Kofler, and
fimile Jaques-Dalcroze. I did
Rhythms twice a week as a child, as
did my mother. Today, we still
dance with our teacher, Sylvia Miller,
one of Doing's original students.
Designed especially for children
to move creatively to music in ways
natural to their development,
Rhythms is based on the premise
that every human being has their
own inner rhythm. This is a useful
premise on many levels, and fundamentally
it's where I know the
Fourth Body lives. Or as Paul Klee
would call it—the 'unified diversity7
{Sketchbooks, IV.43) of inner sensing
and outer perceiving. Ah! the joy of
moving—I remember it! But how
was I ever going to recapture the
moving itself long enough to make
something? Every path I took in
making a phrase of movement
would disappear beneath my feet.
Then I read something:
"When we are children, we discover
ourselves, we slowly discover the extent
of our bodies, we express the particularity
of our body through a series of efforts...
We twist ourselves around and
we find ourselves or rediscover ourselves,
and we are surprised! We touch
a heel, grasp the right foot in the left
hand, hold that cold foot in that warm
palm... Now I know myself by heart.
My heart too. Bah! The whole earth is
marked off..." [Paul Valery, Monsieur
Teste, 1924]
So, the whole earth is being
marked off as we move. This
seemed great. That is, not only are
we learning by moving—equilibrium,
dexterity, even consciousness
itself—we are also making our mark,
writing ourselves on the world,
physically.
This year, in my creative frustration,
I made the secret agenda for
my teaching to observe (if not steal)
the techniques children use to make
and map their dances.

THE 5/6s
I was inspired by the five- and
six-year-olds' math project of pattern-
making on paper and so, when they
came to Rhythms, I asked them to
try to make their patterns with their
bodies in space. They went right to
it, using the immediate sort of child-
talent that blends inspiration with
trial and error. Then came the problem
of how to remember. We talked
about the patterns as dances and
how to capture movements by using
other forms of expression such as
words and pictures. I brought out
big rolls of paper for the children to
work with and they made maps of
their ideas.
The following week, when I
asked the 5/6s to review their maps,
they became very disoriented. I
realized that the sheer act of mapping
a week ago had solidified the
dances in their minds enough for
them to recall what they had done.
Without referring to their original
maps, they danced their dances with
remarkably little variation. Then we
discussed what it meant to rehearse
and how repeating something helps
you remember it. I made sketches of
the children's dances for them to
refer to when they came to class. In
time these sketches were not needed.
The 5/6s worked for three solid
months making dances with towels;
then they performed them.

THE 6/7s DANCE SCORES
I became fascinated with the idea
of remembering movement and wondered
at what age the recording process
would move more easily between
a system of hieroglyphics and
actual movement in space. My answer
came when the 6/7s needed to
work on a play they adapted from an
African tale, "Who's In Rabbit's
House/' which involves many species
of jungle animals attending to
the problem of a rabbit not being
able to get back into his house.
I asked the children to choose an
animal, make up movements, and
record them on paper. They went
right to it. Each week (two months
in the process) they would come to
class, ask for their "scores," and
review and revise as they saw fit.
This seemed to be the age of moving
and mapping.
There were several different
recording techniques: One, the spatial
sequencing of a road map, indicated
with numbers, places, on a
connecting line. Two, the pictorial,
less linear use of words and sketches
to create a context as in a stage set.
Three, the frame-by-frame technique
where each movement was boxed
and numbered as in a film or a comic
strip. And four, recording in
sheer words as in directions for a
play.

THE 7/8s and 9s DANCE SCORES
The 7/8s and 9-year-olds took on the task of dancemaking and scoring
with verve. In terms of recording techniques, I noticed that the boys had
refined the frame-by-frame technique whereas the girls seemed to rely
more on straight language or words with drawings.
The 7/8s girls made dance-books in which the directions for the dance
were broken into phrases and set with a strong sense of design on the
page. The 9-year-olds' Dances With Towels developed into a sophisticated
repertoire of solos, duets, and trios. They made use of their scores
throughout—as the dance evolved, so did the score——which engaged them
in a double editing process in space and on paper.

And so. I have the feeling I
didn't learn what I set out to learn.
This year, while I created the space
for children to make and map their
dances, I stopped trying to dance
and began to paint. Yet why do I
feel like I've been dancing? I am
thinking it's because the paintings
are maps. Big maps. With big thick
strokes on thick paper. Of bodies
and subways and fish. Pictures
painted with all my Four Bodies.
With the First Body, clumsy and
direct; with the Second Body, a limitless
surface of images; and with the
Third, a getting in there and poking
around. Finally, they are commanded
by the Fourth, which speaks for
itself. This is why, then, I feel like
I've been dancing.
As Valery's says: "...We twist
ourselves around and we find ourselves
or rediscover ourselves and
we are surprised!... Now I know my
heart." I hold to this, and will continue
to hold my right foot in my left
hand as I learn my dance.

----------------


THE WIND PROJECT creative dance with children

by Lauren Raker

Flexibility and spontaneity must
never be forgotten when working on
creative projects with young children.
One Friday afternoon last year, a wild
wind and rain storm occurred in New
York City. The children at The Town
School were in their last period of the
day: creative movement and music.
They were first graders, six and
seven year olds to whom the events
outside were overwhelming. Our
school is located right on the edge of
the East River. Cars on the FDR
Drive, which borders the East River,
were being covered by water. The
children were watching people being
blown up and down the street. It had
been difficult enough getting to school,
but the storm had gotten out of control.
The children spent a great deal
of time worrying about how they
would get home and how they would
manage to traverse the floods.
My team teacher, Suzie Schwartz,
and I sat the children down and decided
that we would discuss the events.
We formed a circle and began our
conversation about wind. What words
could they use to describe the wind?
Several children chose words like
revolting and hateful. Their fear was
evident. Others offered pushing, pulling,
blowing. We continued to create
a long list of words that described
their feelings about the power of the
wind. Class ended and we decided to
continue this project for the next few
weeks, basing our process on all of the
natural occurrences of the day.

When the children returned the
following week, we decided to take the
words they had volunteered to describe
the wind and have them create a group
poem. Each child presented a phrase
of his or her own to describe the wind,
and clever and thoughtful poetry was
bom. Two very distinct poems were
created by each of the first grade
classes.
After the poems were completed,
Suzie and I decided that we would
have the children create a wind sound
orchestra. We chose instruments that
would mimic sounds that could be
associated with the rain (bells, triangles,
finger cymbals), thunder (large
cymbal, drums), wind (grates, shakers,
whistles).
Next we divided the group in half.
One group became the orchestra,
while the other group became the
improvisational dancers, moving with
some themes we had developed in
class. We enhanced the orchestral
background by adding a sound effects
recording of thunder, wind and rain.
The children took turns participating
in the orchestra as well as dancing.
The completed project began
with a reading of the poem followed
by the melding of improvised music,

dance and sound effects. The performance
ended with a second reading of
the poem.
The excitement and fun of an
intense project that engaged the children
for three separate sessions, had
been stimulated by the extraordinary
natural events of one day. We were
thrilled by the results and fortunate to
be part of a creative teaching environment
that encourages and applauds
spontaneity and flexibility.



WIND by 1P

Wind, Wind the revolting Wind.
The Wind is cruel,
The Wind is scary,
The Wind, the Wind is pushing me.
The Wind, the Wind is lifting me.
The Wind, the Wind is pulling me.
The Wind is powerful.
Wind, Wind the revolting wind.

WIND by 1K

The Wind swirls and whirls around,
it can trip you and flip you and throw
you about,
Like a merry-go-round.
Umbrellas blowing up and up.
The Wind is very strong.
It can pick you up right off the ground.
The Wind can go from place to place,
and pick up lots of water.
It can blow you,
The Wind seem s like an invisible ghost,
The Wind is all over the world.



----------------

MOVING MEANINGS

by Christine Owen, Alice Cummins


taking dance to the workplace in W. Australia

We are read as we move
We write as we move
We move and we mean
mean to say
mean to move
Moving meanings



In Perth, Western Australia in
March 1992, preparation began for a
project which would take dance to
office workers in the Federal public
sector. The project involved dancer/
choreographers Alice Cummins and
Janet Lee working with the Public
Sector Union. The project was part of
the Art in Working Life program
which is supported by State and Federal
arts funding bodies to encourage
artistic involvement in and representations
of working life. My role was to
record the project. My qualification
was both as a writer of fiction and as
an ex-office worker. I understood the
office environment; in order to better
understand the dance environment and
process, I participated in the project.
Alice and Janet were aware that
they would be breaking new ground
and that all their skills would be required
to bridge the gap between the
world of dance and the world of office
work.
Various discussion documents of
the Art in Working Life program had
demonstrated that dance as a cultural
form was not well represented in the
program. As in most other Western
countries, dance in Australia has generally
not deigned to waltz, pirouette
or even hold out its hand to the everyday
utilitarian world of work. This is
partly due to the predominance of
ballet, which has led to the development
of a dance culture dominated by
a concern with high aesthetic ideals,
the practice of which involves specialised
training. Generally, it is a dance
culture that is neither accessible nor
meaningful to a broad and varied
audience with differing cultural and
social values.
In the workplace, where the intention
is to convey information, dance,
as a non-verbal, non-linear art form, is
a less accessible medium than literature,
song and theatre. It is generally
easier to disseminate information
about a range of issues of concern to
workers through spoken or written
language.
The development of this dance
project, therefore, depended on the
dancers having an approach to dance
which varied in many ways from the
predominant traditions of dance in
Australia.
The dancers and their dance
The dancer/choreographers Alice
Cummins and Janet Lee both work in
the area loosely designated ‘post-modem
dance’. Their work allowed for an
equation to be reached between such
apparently diverse areas as office work
and dance because, through their
‘post-modem’ perspective, both activities
are understood to articulate
through the body. It is on this ground
that dance, with its potential for transformation
and play, found its voice to
communicate with workers in the
Federal Government bureaucracy.
The participants
Participants in the workshops came
from a range of jobs, such as working
directly with the public (for example,
answering enquiries on the telephone
and over the counter) and internal
work (such as operating computers
and being in management positions).
All participants came from a wide
range of cultural backgrounds and all
had varying contact with the world of
dance. Many had never attended
dance classes or events. However,
some had participated in folkdancing
or yoga. The participants attended ten
two-hour workshops over a ten week
period The workshops took place in
a dance studio as well as in the workplace.
Dance as work and work as
dance
The major differences between the
two worlds appeared to be between a
mentally-orientated, rational, hierarchical,
rule-and-regulation-based bureaucracy
in which the individual becomes
an officer occupying a rank, and a
physical, sensory-based, ‘creative’,
‘artistic’, non-hierarchical world in
which individuality appears to be
highly valued
It soon became clear that one of
the outcomes of the project would be
to challenge many of these preconceived
ideas for the dancers as well as
the participants, for those taking part
directly and indirectly.
The aim of the project
The objective of the workshops
was to provide the opportunity for
participants to experience the process
of ‘creativity’, a process which would
allow them to physically embody then-
images, language and experiences.
The workshops offered the dancers
an opportunity to reach outside the
often closed environment of dance to
both learn and communicate. As
anticipated, the workshops challenged
both the way the dancers taught and
what they taught
One of the premises for the workshops
was that not only would participants
be dancing and learning about
the body (with all the potential this
held for improving the physical aspect
of their working lives) but by working
with metaphors and images from then-
working lives, they could ‘literalise’
their experiences and if desired, make
changes in them.
For example, in an exercise that
involved working with a familiar object
such as a telephone, pen or keyboard,
or retracing their journeys to
work, the participants would simplify
these movements and work with their
‘physical essence’. The exploration of
these movements led to an awareness
of the body in the work environment
The following section tells of both
the practicalities and the poetics of
what emerged from the workshops for
the participants and the dancers. “The
Workshop” describes the workshop
process and the practical benefits that
the participants experienced. “The
Body Works Another Day” is my
response to the in-house dance Crossing
the Floor with Intent, created and
performed by Alice and Janet especially
for the participants at the end of the
workshop. The sound composition for
the piece was created by Rob Muir.
The performance served to represent
the work that the participants had
developed during the workshops so
that they could witness their working
lives from a movement and dance
perspective. In this way, the performance
fulfilled one of the project’s
main objectives which was to facilitate
an exchange between the working lives
of dancers/artists and office workers.

THE WORKSHOP

Alignment work
The first hour of each workshop was
spent on alignment work. The dancers
chose alignment work to put participants
in touch with their senses, their bodies,
and their imaginations.
Each week the participants addressed
a different skeletal and muscular part of
the body, such as the foot, the pelvis,
the arm. The first week, for example,
involved articulation of the head. Both
in terms of the type of work they normally
did and the hierarchical situation
in which they functioned, the participants
came to the workshops with the
sense of being, as one participant put it,
“top-heavy.” The alignment work was followed
by a developmental movement sequence
(rolling, crawling, walking, etc.) in
which participants explored a gradually
acquired series of movements. This
movement sequence was practiced as a
group with each person working/moving
in their own time, while maintaining a
sense of the others. Moving like this
involved the subtle introduction of
peripheral vision. The sequence led the
participants to be able to change levels
easily and fluidly between movements
such as rolling, crawling, walking and
folding. With this preparation, they
were able to move with ease from the
alignment work to the more full-bodied,
improvisational dance activity.
Dancing the ‘everyday’
The second half of each workshop
involved exploration and structured
improvisations. In one exercise, the
participants recreated in the studio the
steps they took each day from the entrance
of their workplace to their particular
work position. There was much
humour as the participants dodged each
other along imaginary corridors, into
elevators, in and out of the tea room,
taking imaginary stairs two at a time.
In the coming weeks they would refine,
exaggerate, and play with their journeys,
as choreographers.
In another exercise, each participant
was asked to consider what personal
gestures they typically had. Some
scratched their heads saying they didn’t
have any! Others recognised that they
had habits such as constantly pushing
their glasses over the bridge of their
nose, rubbing the back of their neck,
pulling at a tie, fidgeting with clothing.
Eventually these idiosyncrasies would
be added to their dance vocabulary, like
spice to a cooking pot.
Two men walk towards each
other passing closely, narrowly
missing. A woman and man
walk towards each other. They
stop, he fingers his earlobe, she
adjusts her glasses. They move
on. He stops, I stop, we look, I
rub my neck, I wince, he laughs
and rubs his chin. We move on.
Dance as process rather than performance,
was particularly appropriate
for a project involving people working
within a bureaucratic structure where
workers receive and send, and enact
only a part of the whole. Working with
process was also signficant for the
dancers. The process involved a variety
of stages from attending meetings in the
workplace to providing a space for
relaxation and innovation. It was important
for the dancers because it allowed
a relationship to be developed
between them and the participants. On
this basis, an exchange of social and
cultural ideas about movement, dance
and the body in the context of the
workplace could begin to develop.
The workshops emphasised multiplicity
of movement. The body was
focussed on as it changed in different
environments and situations, as it
moved from an entrance to a place of
rest, from the workplace to the home,
from the kitchen to the garden, from the
office to the basketball court
Sometimes the participants were
guided by the dancers with an image,
sometimes by a question. What do you
do, which way do you go, is it like this
later in the day, earlier in the day?
How do we trace the present?
He swings his arms energetically,
divesting himself of his
coat and scarf, spinning into his
chair and reaching for the telephone.
Now the movement is
repeated, the movement flows,
now a teetering body, windmilling
arms, swirls to the ground.
The workshops used imagination
and improvisation as a way to transform
mental or sensory experience into bodily
expression. Aids to the imagination
were used such as moving while wearing
an item of work clothing. This
drew attention to the differences inherent
in various locales such as work,
home, places of leisure. Wearing an
article of clothing such as a tie, a shoe,
allowed participants to play with their
« own image as an image, thereby gaining
a new perspective on the multiplicity
of images that we come to know as
‘the self’.
The dancers worked with participants
to physically embody such abstract
notions as pressure, fear, co-operation,
isolation, hierarchy. In this way
they were able to address some of the
stresses, strains and pleasures of work in
an office environment.

Benefits in the workplace

The issue of ‘creativity’ in the
workplace is no lightweight matter (to
use a nicely embodied metaphor). The
key to success in any organisation is
often the imaginative worker who can
see beyond what is given, take a calculated
risk, initiate an innovative
approach; someone not bound by what
has gone before.
It is partly to encourage innovative
managers that modem management
programs in both the public and private
sectors use activities such as
caving, abseiling, rock climbing, to
develop the skills of quick, innovative,
lateral thinking as well as team building
and leadership qualities.
A participant in one of the studio
workshops was a senior training consultant
He offered these observations:
“Many management programs are
designed to enhance managers’ capacity
to manage risks. This frequently
involves experiencing events that
‘push’ the individual to the edge of
their comfort zone. Abseiling is often
used for such training. In my opinion
these dance workshops were more
challenging than jumping off any
cliff... The workshops provided each
participant with additional experiences
and practice at managing personal
risk at some level...
“Potential tangible benefits include:
increased performance due to
improved stress management capacity;
reduced likelihood of occupational
overuse syndrome because of improved
physical awareness; increased efficiency
due to quicker decision making due
to enlivened creative thinking processes;
and more effective work performance
due to enhanced sense of well
being...
“Movement and dance specialists
have so very much to share with other
workers. The human being is in a
state of near constant movement. To
be able to treat or view this movement
as a dance, and to be able to choreograph
your own dance in your day-to-
day life is an act of tremendous empowerment.
To help people see this
viewpoint can be of great value.”
A female office manager (a friend
not involved in the workshops) framed
these views in another way. She had
recently returned from a management
exercise which involved being lowered
into a deep cave with four others, one
torch between them, and memorised
instructions as to how to find their
way out She explained:
“...One of the greatest problems
experienced by senior women in management
is having to work in a predominantly
male environment. The
challenge of this, for both men and
women, is of course never addressed
or acknowledged in these terms. Consequently
I am thrown into a training
exercise based on masculine notions of
physical challenge and expected to
cope. Perhaps with the so-called
feminisation of the workplace’, the
idea of what constitutes a challenge
should be addressed. Perhaps, dance
workshops and other such exercises in
which men move in a traditional female’
space would provide men in
particular with the opportunity to address
some of their social conditioning.”
One of the potential benefits of
bringing office work together with
dance is improved physical and personal
health. The attention a dancer
pays to her body is an essential skill
and a constant factor. The occupational
health hazards of the typical
office workplace include eye strain,
headaches, occupational overuse syndrome,
tense shoulder muscles, neck
and stomach tension and many other
ailments. Although ergonomic furniture
and subdued lighting of the best
office environments shows increasing
awareness of occupational health issues,
attention and care is still required
by the individual.
As participants learned to engage
physically and ‘play’, they began to
experience changes on a personal
level:
“I saw how supple the performers
were and decided it’s not too late to
change. The workshops made me
more aware of how I move. I am now
more aware of the physical body in
the home and the work environment. “
[female administrator]
“We learned more about how our
limbs and bodies move. I personally
developed a greater awareness of my
physical self which carries over to the
present... It was a significant learning
experience to rediscover a ‘sense
of wonder’ that can be associated with
the smallest most subtle movement.”
[male training consultant]
The benefits of the project were
physical and intellectual, personal and
public. The worlds of dance and work
had met and a productive exchange
had occurred. The dancers had
achieved a greater understanding of
office work culture and an enriched
vocabulary of movement, and the
participants expressed clear satisfaction
in the unusual journey they had
chosen to embark on.

THE BODY WORKS ANOTHER DAY

a response to Crossing the Floor with Intent,
a dance by Alice Cummins and Janet Lee
Crackle thin/thick noise. A car revs.
She saunters, she walks then falling she,
they fall into space. Rolling the body to
computer rhythms, birds chirping. Bodies
propelled forward, ‘ifs a regular
job’, rolling one after another, ‘you can
say that for it’. Awkward body, zip-
pered buttoned and clasped, adjust the
clothing. At odds, with and not yet
with. Hear the tiny tiny pin squeak
rhythms, hardly a rhythm at all. Silence.
The clatter of people with people. The
space opens to chatter recorded at full
volume, it's like the release of a thousand
pigeons. The dancers walk. They
meet, they dance a jig. Phones ring in
the silence. They move apart each
balancing the movement of the other.
Two halves make a whole. Springing
steps, places to go people to see.
She sits. She keys, she plays the keys.
She sits, she is the seat, she is the keys.
The bell pings, she reaches the end of
the line, the end, the very full stop. She
swivels, she turns, down the water gurgles.
Down she falls rolling backward
over the other’s body, the body becomes
the seat. Let’s do it. One more time.
The keys tap tap. The lazy brown dog
jumps over the something fox. The
chair sighs her into place. Leaping to
their feet they call out. Got to make it
happen. ‘Lisa, Ian, Shirley’, they run
from one to another passing on the
message, things to do to do to do.
Stamp me press me determine me.
Documents will be filled in, sign on the
dotted line.
The body expands, edges fill and overflow,
the singer croons me baby, baby.
Off she goes on maternity leave. It’s
more than she bargained for and who
did the bargaining? First break, ha ha,
in seventeen years ha ha. She takes
centre stage, she cradles the phone.
The tennis balls flip to and fro. Ping
pong, she rolls into the half-court.
Ping pong, she rolls under the net, she
is no champion, just a born survivor.
Arms swivel in their sockets, swiveling
hip joints, her foot glides forward as
she pulls herself through another day.
Against the far wall another watches,
suspended, only her head moving to and
fro on a musical merry-go-round. She
curves her body, she’s a lion-tamer, a
bareback rider, she has a lasso. She is
riding on the a bus, a bus to work.

Graceful birds float and leap. Someone
has given instructions, how to be graceful,
how to float, how to leap, how to
be. Learning curves can bend and bow
a body. Folding. Rolling. Sitting.
Simon says, do what I do and I do.
Balancing. On a foot, on a toe, on a
point, it’s a mute point. Turning, the
sound is turning, I hear a sound turning
and see a body turn. I watch.
Just checking, keeping you in check.
She balances on the back of the other.
A foot against a neck, a hip against a
thigh. She sits, cupped in the thighs of
another. You support me, I will climb
you, I will support you, you will climb
me.
It’s a crossing times five, Monday to
Friday and all that. Some cross seven
times. And here it comes again, watch
the space, mark your trail. This is your
life. Lift a foot, place it, straight leg,
bent leg. Eyes front. She steps, all is
sure. 'When push comes to shove and
you don’t know, you can’t know, can
you?’ Will she ever get up off the
floor? Hear the latest, so and so, said
they’re falling like flies. Stay on track,
places to go. Blown by the wind. We
are here to help. At your service. It all
depends. With your assistance. Yours
sincerely. I’m out of here.
She keys in her sleep, keys, whisks and
beats. She’d rather be whisked than
beaten. The beater shapes the bowl, the
pen sways over its white terrain, her
feet mark the ground on which she
walks, she’s come a long way and the
beater shapes and the pen sways and
the body shapes, the body sways and
the body works another day.

----------------


CURRENT a multidisciplinary collaboration

by Andrew Cohen, Bill Botzow, Meg Cottam,
Michelle Distel, Jay Knapp


CURRENT, a performance by
visual artist Bill Botzow, dancers Meg
Cottam and Michelle Distel, and musi-
cian/composer jay Knapp, is a working
examination of the way people work.
Two of the four artists are a recently
married couple; the two others are
friends, both married, one pregnant
throughout the process. They vary in
age from mid-20s to mid-40s. As director
of No. B.I.A.S. (North Bennington
Independent Artists' Space) in Vermont,
the gallery where Current was performed,
located directly above their rehearsal
space, I had the unique opportunity
to observe the group's process.
The four artists began by agreeing on
a format in which to work. They decided
to meet twice a week; the dancers
danced, the musician improvised on the
saxophone, the visual artist did action
drawings (my term) on large pieces of
paper. He did one each session. All
drawings made during the rehearsals/
performances were present at the sessions,
the new drawing added to the
grouping each time. These drawings
became a symbol of their work together,
the only tangible artifacts of the sessions.
Their accumulation represented time,
work and progress.
The process was one of, what I call,
knowledgeable interaction. Each time,
they got together and played, like a jazz
group might. However, it was not what
I would call strictly improvisational—
they talked too much for that, reflecting
and shaping as they went along.
The challenging part for all of them
was the collaboration. It was a collaboration
in an unusual sense because,
although they interacted, the emphasis
was on their individual activities, which
combined, filled, and created spaces.
They worked with no other scores than
the agreement of times to meet, and the
environment created by Bill's large sectional
drawings. These drawings later
became part of his installation of draw-
x ing, painting and sculpture that occupied
i the gallery as an autonomous exhibition
* and created the physical and visual
staging for the performances.
The artists' various life-styles also
dictated the work in terms of their differing
schedules and obligations outside the
work. They came into conflict regarding
the working process fairly regularly,
which was as fruitful for and telling
about their project as anything else. For
me, their project was a humanistic one
of how people work and live together.
Their endeavor became symbolic of
trying to to posit an autonomous individual
in a cohesive society. In the end,
their efforts proved successful in terms of
progressing their individual aesthetic
languages and creating a group dynamic
where the whole was greater than the
sum of its parts. The stronger their personal
languages and idioms became, the
stronger the group performance became,
illustrating an interesting paradigm.
It was also a kind of dramaturgical
metaphor (“all the world's a stage"), in
which the performers played the roles of
themselves. This was valuable to the
artists' understanding of themselves, and
interesting to the audience in its theatrical
presentation of the artists as themselves;
it struck a funny chord. Current
is an innovative kind of theater, which
for me evokes, among other notions, the
realization that we play so many concurrent
roles in our lives (workers, bosses,
mothers, lovers, spouses, civic members,
and guardians) that all we have to
do to observe theater is become conscious
of ourselves and the people we
live and work with.
For the artists, Current was partially
a study of organic movement—of
change. This work-in-progress will
always be such; its structure provides it
with no place to land, like our lives.





The drawings, paintings and sculpture in the exhibition are the outgrowth
of several years of observing and drawing water in local streams and
rivers.
I make the drawings by layering black, white and colored chalk on a
watercolor ground. Each piece is comprised of twelve to twenty units done
one after another. As each segment is completed it is pushpinned to the wall
adjacent to another until a square or rectangular block is achieved. The
connecting lines are sometimes accidental, sometimes not
I make the sculptures from dead and down wood. First I debark, cut,
and drill branches and saplings and then I reassemble the parts into flexible
structures. Originally, these pieces were floated to interact with currents and
thus reveal water's motion. I also hang them from tree limbs to move in the
air. More recently, I've been combining them with the big drawings. Like
their initial subject, water, the various parts can be considered separately or
together.
The paintings are the most recent invention. They continue the processes
established in the drawings. Here, a rough, multicolored ground is partially
covered with freely painted black and white oil paint, then parallel surface
lines are dropped through the paint film.

Bill Botzow


At the onset we had inordinately little
conversation or instruction as to the
form the process and the product would
take. Our main score, so to speak, was
to have no score. In considering form
as information, to choose to work with
little or no form would be to take uninformed
action. Being that we had no
directions, no score, no format, we
accessed the part of ourselves which
enables one to intuit or create a situation
without a plan or blueprints. Our
intuition created our form. W e gained
information from our experience as
opposed to needing information to have
an experience. It seems to me that our
prescribed demands were for the most
part on ourselves. Each of us composes
as we see fit, (with our presence as well
as our absence) contributing our part or
element to the collective. Within each
of us, I believe our intuition is relied
upon to create our form, our process
and our products.

Jay Knapp
musician


For me, a session often proceeds this
way:
I enter the work space with greetings
and small talk to my partners. After
hanging up my coat I take the completed
drawings from each of the previous
sessions and lay them on the floor. Then
I take graphite, a folded fresh sheet of
paper, my drawing board, and begin
making instant marks in response to
what I notice. The dancers' stances,
motions and rhythms, the musician's
sound, the marks on my page or the
sounds from the next room may engage
my attention. Sometimes I draw with my
eyes closed or my left hand. When the
initial folded sheet is partially filled I turn
it over and continue. I usually move
around the room a few times in a session,
sometimes coming quite close to
my partners, sometimes withdrawing to
the edges. I am a participating observer.
When the next portion of the sheet is
also partially completed, I unfold and
refold the page and continue working.
Eventually, all the parts become linked.
At some point between forty minutes and
an hour we arrive at closure. Then I add
the completed sheet to the previous
drawings. We take some time to reflect
on the session and make any necessary
arrangements. I retrieve the drawings,
gather up my belongings and depart.

Bill Botzow
visual artist


We (Bill, Meg, Michelle and Jay) have
been meeting and working together for
some weeks. Originally brought together
by the inspiration of Bill's drawings
and their potential as performance
scores; what happened was a continuing
emergence of confluences. Each artist
has brought their individual perspective
to the working process, observing the
gradual convergence of energies and response.
What has interested me so
much is the dual development of accumulation
and distillation. The folded
drawings being the accumulated record
of working sessions. The sound and
movement being the resonance of ur
mutual understanding.
Initially, a body in early pregnancy
and a need to re-evaluate movement
involvements and ways of being, combined
with the decision to pursue Authentic
Movement. This encouraged a
very slow/non-moving or few movements/closed
eyes/waiting-stance in
terms of source and topic for improvisation.
This became mixed with open
eye observation of other participants.
This very internal and self-involved period
started changing after a few weeks
towards a more interactive relationship
with Bill, Michelle and Jay. More frequent
eye contact, touching, duets—an
overall closeness. Solos retained some
possibility for the earlier absorbed kind
of movement. I should note that opportunities
for solos sometimes happened
with other activity carrying on in
the room.

Meg Cott


When we first talked about how we
wanted to approach working together
everyone seemed interested in simplicity—not
giving directions or outlining
goals. So we each engaged in what we
personally felt moved to explore within
our own medium. We observed each
other and interacted with one another.
We have returned to this process for
each rehearsal.
There are several challenges in having
no prearranged directions, rules or
cues. Though we originally strived for
simplicity, the environment we created
can be particularly demanding. The
demands fall on one's focus and creativity;
to stay alert, responsive and sensitive
without being able to rely on any preconceived
notions of what is expected
or appropriate. One's state of mind
must be far more lucid than if things
were mapped out. When I dance a ‘
piece in which every step has been
well-rehearsed, I don't have to make the
same kind of creative decisions. My
energy is directed towards the execution
and performance of the choreography.
In Current, what I dance is the creating
of the choreography. My impetus to
move is related to my personal convictions,
the other artists' activities and the
overall effect of our interactions as a
group.
The challenge of this process increases
with the addition of an audience.
In the studio my task is to follow
my individual impulses while responding
to and assimilating the other activity
around me. In a performance, the presence
of the audience will become as important
an element of the environment
as the music, movement, drawings or
sculpture and consequently part of what
affects my choices. So, given that the
audience will witness what has been our
rehearsal process and not a previously
arranged or defined product, it will be
interesting to see how the audience may
transform the work, and in turn how
they will experience it.

Michelle Distel dancer



We met twenty-five or so times to engage
in a process that continued most
features of our first meeting. Through
repeating our unspoken structure, a form
arose that combined our individual
practices with a deepening awareness of
each other. I was impelled as much by
a desire to meet and combine as to
create a “performance." I think our way
of working together was as much a social
form as a performance form.
The four public showings were quite
different from each other. The first happened
as part of the opening of my
exhibition at No. B.I.A.S. We warmed
up ahead of time, withdrew from the
space as people came in and then found
a way with movement and sound to
make space within the viewers. At the
end of this showing we invited others to
come and join us on subsequent Tuesdays.
Several came back the next Tuesday
and joined in, including several
children, while a new smaller audience
came to watch. This session was quite
wonderful and spontaneous but also
more diffuse, disjointed, undifferentiated.
For the third meeting we invited
those who came to work with us to
warm up with us, then watch while we
worked together. Then we stopped to
talk about our way of working and afterwards
resumed with the others joining
in. Some who had come simply to be
audience “played" too. I found this
session successful, especially after we
started up again, when everyone's contribution
created a sense in the room
that was strong and satisfying.
The last session was different again.
A few of us arrived early and started
working before any audience arrived.
Those who came to work with us joined
in easily and those who came to watch
found their way around the gallery space
as we did. As attention points moved
from one side of the space to the other,
the audience did too. It seemed as if
audience, sculpture, drawings and participants
were in simultaneous motion.
I realize more than ever that I am
interested in exploring and working with
forms that come from attention to the
situation at hand.

Bill

Making a personal process public always
has some unexpected results. The performance
during the gallery opening
stands as a unique/not wholly satisfying
event unto itself. Maintaining a trueness
to the varying rhythms of our long
established working process was very
difficult with such a large viewing
group. Other sessions where there were
“watchers" had, as part of the process,
a steady drawing in of those present.
Drawing in by eye contact, feeling and
proximity. I realize in retrospect this
was a part of the working process we
might have taken pains to articulate in
order to make participation possible
with a large group of viewers. I don't
think the same problems would have occurred
if the group was physically participating.
The arrival, exchange and discussions
with a pretty wide variety of community
members was interesting and
satisfying. This took a slightly different
form and tone each week depending on
who showed up and what we felt was
needed. The openness, forcible change,
inclusiveness, stimulation, and heightened
awareness of the community interaction
is a long longed-for and treasured
experience. I guess it's this feeling that
sparkles in my memory.

Meg


The word improvisation was often used
to describe our process. The dictionary
definition of improvise is: to compose
or invent without preparation. Consequently,
one would need to be unprepared
in order to truly improvise. Although
our first meeting was indisputably
improvisation, it seems to me that
the degree or amount of our work together
which remained solely improvi-
sational decreased proportionally with
each meeting.
This idea poses a challenge to the
participants when their goal is to improvise.
Granted, in any process or
performance there will always be something
which one will be unprepared for,
but unless one goes out of her/his way
to create a new situation, one is recreating
previous situations.
O nce a group has worked together,
they have to some degree developed a
vocabulary. As the vocabulary increases,
so does the element of predictability-
To me improvisation is an indispensable
tool with which one creates, composes
or choreographs. O nce something
has been created, how does one
maintain the element of improvisation
in successive meetings?
Personally, I feel that improvisation
is a form which is executed in relation
to a structure. Improvisation is done
off of a form. To improvise off of
something which has no form is something
else. W hen one improvises, I
believe one is making a personal statement
amidst a variety of set statements.
Structure can “exist" without improvisation
but cannot be “created"
without improvisation. It does not
seem possible to have true improvisation
without structure. To work with
no mutual structure whatsoever is to
spontaneously compose. W e, each of
the artists, are drawing from the entirety
of our vocabularies to create material
at our meetings.
I believe the challenges we incurred
when taking our work out of the studio
and into the performance spaces are
directly related to our form. In my
mind the form we chose required us to
be composing and not improvising. To
compose amongst three other artists of
varying media is one set of challenges.
To compose and perform amidst an
eager audience is another.

Jay

----------------

A MOVING DECISION notes on the improvising mind
by Kent De Spain

I recently had reason to do
some thinking about improvisation.
I was scheduled to lecture at Mid-
dlebury College in Vermont about my
quantum-based model of the improvising
mind (CQ, Vol. 19, No. 1), but I
wanted the students to understand the
model within a larger context of impro-
visational decision-making. In particular,
I wanted to explore two aspects of
the decision process: first, the neurological
cycle of action and information
exchange that occurs within the improviser
at the moment of decision; and,
second, the types of improvisational
decisions that we make. The following
is a brief presentation of these ideas.
I/O PROCESSING
The deeper we try to peer into the
internal flow of information during
improvisation (the brain's input/output
' processing to borrow from the computer
lexicon), the murkier the view becomes.
This is because much of the electrochemical
activity during decision-making
occurs within the confines of the
brain itself, and scientists are just beginning
to scratch at the surface of
understanding internal brain function.
What we are better able to identify and
monitor are the signals that come into
and out of the brain through the central
nervous system1
A simplified view of nerve structure
describes two pathways for neural
information—efferent and afferent.
Efferent nerves send signals from the
brain out to the muscles and organs.
These outbound messages are electrochemical
demands for action. Afferent
nerves send signals back to the brain
from the five external senses and the
body's proprioceptive systems. These
inbound messages provide the brain
with information about the body in
relation to itself and its environment.
To provide an image of how this
two-way traffic operates during improvisation,
I created the following circular
model:2
• Signals Sent: A complex set of
neural instructions is sent from the
brain, through the efferent nerves,
and out towards a variety of muscles.
These instructions, all combined,
will produce a specific
movement.
• Signals Received: There is a brief
delay (measured in milliseconds)
while the signals travel to and
arrive at their various destinations.
• Movement Results: Almost immediately,
the muscles contract, causing
movement.
• Monitoring Beings: Movement
triggers the proprioceptive systems
to send signals back to the brain
about the relative "success" of the
intended movement, and more
generally, about the state of the
body in time and space. Such
information is also gathered from
the five external senses.
• Information Ordered and Evaluated:
The amount of information
returning from the periphery is
staggering, yet somehow we find a
way to make sense of it all.
• Brain Generates New Signals:
This is the moment of decision,
where we choose whether to adjust
and continue the previous movement,
continue with the next movement
of an intended series, or set
off in an entirely new direction.3
As I mentioned in my last article
["More Thoughts on Science and
the Improvising Mind," CQ 19:1],
the brain may, at this moment,
create multiple sets of signals, corresponding
to various possibilities,
but eventually must send just one
set.
While this diagram provides a
clean and simple look at information
flow, the reality of this cycle is, of
course, much more complicated. The
signals do not travel out, then in, then
Signals Sent
out, then in. Information is going in
both directions unceasingly. It is up to
the brain to sort out the pulses and
decide how they relate to movement
intentions. New decisions must often
be made before a complete picture of
the last movement can be gleaned from
the returning signals. Having to make
quick decisions at this kind of informational
disadvantage places a certain
kind of pressure on our brains. I believe
that this forces our brains to take
a more proactive role in information
gathering. Instead of simply relying on
signals already returning, our brains
"seek out" desired information by
sending out a separate, primarily unconscious,
set of movement instructions
which are demands for the muscles
that control our senses, our eyes, ears,
etc., to perform specific information
gathering tasks.
James J. Gibson, in his fascinating
book The Senses Considered as Perceptual
Systems, has addressed this issue by
dividing movements into two categories—performatory
and exploratory.
Performatory movements simply accomplish
movement-oriented goals
(e.g., raise your arm, take a step, etc.).
Exploratory movements are specifically
designed to gather information (e.g.,
turn your head to the right, and then
shift and focus your eyes to check
where the edge of the space is). In the
subtle reality of movement improvisation,
"performatory" and "exploratory"
are ends of a spectrum, not an either/
or proposition. Actions of the sensory
organs are not reserved exclusively for
exploration. Looking, listening, touching,
etc., can be gestures and therefore
have a performatory intention. And
most improvisers would probably
agree that movement in any part of the
body (not just eyes or ears, etc) can be
exploratory. The dividing lines are
unclear, but thinking about and moving
with Gihson's ideas can spark a new
understanding of movement intentions.
INTENDING DECISIONS
The most mysterious and challenging
part of the decision cycle, and the
part that dominates much of my own
theorizing, is the area between the
evaluation of information and the sending
of a new signal. This is the moment
of decision itself. In the past, I
have attempted to shed light on this
complex process by applying equally
complex paradigms derived from chaos
theory and quantum theory. This time
I would like to approach the decisionmaking
quandary more directly by
attempting to make sense of the
"types" of decisions I see myself and
other improvisers making while moving.
To avoid confusion, I want to make
clear that the decisions I am discussing
deal more with "intention" than with
the actual movement result, because I
feel that the interpretations of any
"movement," either apparent or unseen,
are so multifarious as to be beyond
explication. But when I focused
my thinking on the "intention" (you'll
see that I am using this term loosely)
behind decisions, I was surprised that
only four types came to mind. They
are as follows:
• Initiating
"Initiating" is choosing to perform
an action. It involves a conscious
intention about moving, or
perhaps a focusing of conscious
awareness on an aspect of being/
moving. It could be as obvious as
choosing to perform a muscular
contraction or release, or it could be
as subtle as consciously monitoring
the sensation of your own blood-
flow.
• Reacting
"Reacting" is not a conscious
decision. It might be better called a
"body" or "pre-conscious" decision
because it happens before we can
engage our initiating consciousness.
"Reacting" is movement that stems
from instinct or from our habitual
movement patterns (these can be
innate or trained). It is movement
for which no thinking (higher brain
function) is required. It is often
our means of protection when falling
or when an object is hurtling
towards us; and sometimes, even
when we are not protecting ourselves
from a specific danger or
falling back on old habits, the
speed and force of our moving surpasses
the pace at which we are
comfortable initiating, so w e must
allow our reactions to take over.
At this point, it becomes difficult to
distinguish reacting from some
forms of "flowing" (see below).
• Not Doing
• "Not Doing" is just that It is a
consious decision to not initiate or
to not react. It is the intention of
inhibiting movement or some aspect
of moving. Of course we, as living
creatures, are unable to ever truly
stop moving. But if you were in a
stable position and chose to not
initiate (and no outside force was
acting upon you), only autonomic
or semi-autonomic movements4
would occur, and you would go
nowhere until you released the
inhibition. Not reacting, then, is a
conscious choice to try to override
a body decision before it can be
executed. For example, if you were
falling and suppressed your body's
natural protective movements, you
might find yourself performing
movements that were dangerous
and/or unusual.
• Flowing
"Flowing" is allowing our
bodies to follow the physical or
aesthetic momentum created by
certain movements, impulses, or
images through to an organic conclusion.
It is a "decision" to disengage
or not engage the initiating
consciousness. Where reacting was
pre-conscious, flowing is sub-conscious
or unconscious. Flowing can
be as simple as coming to the "natural
end" of a gesture you initiate,
or it can be as subtle and enthralling
as the long sequences of moving
we can experience when truly
engaged at a body level.
As with Gibson's performatory/exploratory
dualism, the lines between
decision types are quite fuzzy. I see no
reason to think certain improvisational
choices could not arise from two or
more categories in combination, or that,
if you looked at different parts of the
body separately, you might not see all
four categories presented simultaneously.
Categorization, though, is not my
primary intention. I hope, by thinking
and moving on parallel tracks, to spur
myself on to a greater understanding
of what I consider to be ultimately
unfathomable. CQ has provided a
forum for me to put these thoughts out
into the collective improvisational
unconscious in an effort to find agreement
or amendment or debate. If these
ideas interest you, move with them
Ponder them Please let me know
what you find. 


NOTES
1 By central nervous system, I am referring
to the brain and spinal cord. Also, I
apologize for the standard dualistic
"body or brain" language of these descriptions.
To do justice to a more integrated
approach to this material would
involve many more words and sidetrack
the article away from the simple points I
am hoping to convey. I hope to delve
more deeply into the structure and function
of the nervous system during improvisation
in a future article.
2 This visual/verbal model is an adaptation
and an elaboration of a verbal
model by the music psychologist Jeff
Pressing. His article, "Improvisation:
Methods and Models" is well worth
reading and can be found in the book
Generative Processes in Music: The Psychology
of Performance, Improvisation, and Composition,
edited by John A. Sloboda; Clarendon
Press, Oxford; 1988.
3 This whole cycle also applies to the
performance of pre-existing material, the
difference lies in the fact that in that case
more emphasis is placed on the "template"
for the material. The signal generated
is provided by that template. Proprioceptive
response and evaluation
emphasize the measuring of actual results
against the template. Then subsequent
signals are often adjusted to more closely
meet the performer's interpretation of the
template. I believe that improvisation
demands a "broader" awareness to facilitate
the simultaneous invention and execution
of a newly created template, and
that the best improvisers are those that
can achieve this broader awareness without
sacrificing the subtle attentiveness of
performance.
4 Autonomic movements are movements
performed by parts of the body over
which we basically have no control (i.e.,
heartbeat, circulation, etc.) Semi-auto-
nomic movements are those over which
we have limited control (you cannot stop
breathing indefinitely, but you can speed
it up, slow it down, or stop it for a short
time).

----------------

MOVING THE DREAMBODY movement work in process oriented psychology
by Amy Mindell

The following is an example of the application of
movement work in process oriented psychology.
One day, a client of mine sat down and began to
talk very seriously about problems she was having
making plans and commitments. As she talked, her
motions were quite intense and linear except for a
fleeting moment when one of her hands quickly
tossed a sweater she was carrying into the air,
throwing it in a nonchalant manner off to the side.
When I encouraged her to notice this unexpected
tossing of the sweater and to focus her awareness
on the quality of that movement, she seemed shy but
curious to find out what that motion was about.
She picked up the sweater again and seemed to
enjoy flippantly tossing it into the air. After she did
this a number of times, I asked her to stand up and
try the same movement but this time without the
sweater.

She stood up and experimented with quick, indirect,
flicking movements as she threw her arms, legs, head
and finally her whole body in unexpected spurts in
many directions around the room. She laughed, thoroughly
enjoying the sense of abandon and freedom.
But suddenly she stopped and said sheepishly, “I don’t
know what I’m doing. It feels great but could it be
helpful?” I suggested that she follow this mysterious
dance just a bit longer and let its meaning reveal itself
to her.

I joined her in her dance as we threw ourselves in
quick lunges and spurts around the room. As we
moved I asked her to make a face to go along with the
quality of her movements and possibly add sounds as
well. Her eyes opened wide as she made strong blowing
sounds with her mouth. I then asked her to “see”
what she was doing, or tell a story about it. She said
she saw and felt the image of a great wind goddess
who was following the winds of fate! She continued to
unfold the story of this wind goddess as she tumbled
and turned in an unexpected and thrilling way.
When she finally landed on the ground, smiling,
she said she realized that this was the quality she
needed in dealing with her everyday problems: not
so much organizing, analyzing or planning life but
instead—living it spontaneously!

This is an example of a woman who unfolded her
process through the tools of process oriented psychology.
The woman is not a dancer, but found her own natural
dance by focusing on her spontaneous motions and allowing
them to unfold. She discovered through her dance a
new attitude toward her life, and a world of possibilities.

Process Work
Process oriented psychology, commonly called ‘process
work’, was developed by my partner Arnold Mindell and
associates in Switzerland and the U.S. over the past 25
years. Process work is a form of psychotherapy which at
its core is based on the ancient knowledge of Taoism and
the inherent wisdom of nature. It respects the known and
understandable world while delving into the mysterious,
dreamlike and unknown dimensions of life. Its application
ranges from working with people in near death and comatose
states to group and political work, relationship work,
movement and bodywork, meditation, and art work. Process
work reveals that the seeds of solutions and great
sources of creativity are found just in those places we least
expect it: in our most difficult problems, in our spontaneous
movements, and in our dreams.

Movement, in the most general sense of the word, is
the core of process work because the term “process” means
the flow of experience, the movement which is inherent in
life and nature. Like Taoists who spend their lives studying
and adjusting to the on-going transformations in nature,
the process worker notices and joins the river of our experiences
and attempts to assist nature in its unfolding.
Whether focusing on a body symptom, dream, movement,
relationship conflict, a group interaction, or an extreme
state of consciousness (otherwise called psychosis), the
process worker asks, “What is moving? What is changing?”
and attempts to follow nature’s winding path.

States and Processes
A process orientation towards life contrasts with a
state-oriented view of events. A static view of life tends to
label experiences with names which are only momentarily
applicable. Such names as “pain,” “relationship trouble,”
or “movement difficulties,” are only static descriptions of
dynamic processes which are in the process of unfolding.
Once we tap into and follow the movement inside of these
momentary states, we discover fluid and creative processes.
Like all movement-oriented people, process workers understand
events by getting into the stream of experience rather
than analyzing life from the outside. Most importantly,
process work focuses on the creative spark behind our
individual, couple or group experiences.

Perception and Channels
When I went to Zurich in 1980, I had been trained in
dance and was looking for a way to work with people with
movement which delved deeply into each person’s individual
nature and creativity. I absolutely loved dance, but felt
that I was a bit stuck in my movement repertoire. Process
work afforded me a vocabulary to understand my movement
processes and go beyond my own perceptual movement
boundaries. Let me speak generally about process
theory and then specifically about movement.
Signals are bits of information which manifest in different
channels—a stomach pain, a gesture, a relationship
situation. Channels are modes of experience, neutral or
empty vessels through which information manifests. The
channels most commonly identified are the kinesthetic
(movement), visual (visions, dreams, hallucinations), auditory
(outer and inner sounds or voices), proprioceptive
(inner body sensations and/or feelings), and relationship
and world channels which occur when we focus on our
interactions with other people or on events in the world
and environment.
Process, as we use the term, refers to the evolving flow
of signals as they appear and move through the various
channels. The art of process work is to follow and aid the
natural flow or movement of process as it winds its own
unique path of development.
Processes are structured by their relative distance from
one’s awareness. The term primary process refers to
those aspects of our process which are close to our awareness,
with which we identify in a given moment. In the
example of the wind goddess, we notice that her primary
intention or process was quite serious and focused on
problems having to do with making plans and commitments.
Secondary processes refer to all events which we
experience as “happening to us,” which are farther away
from our awareness and with which we do not identify,
like the toss of the sweater that led us to the great wind
goddess.
The terms primary and secondary are different from the
terms “conscious” and “unconscious.” This difference is
due to several factors. Our primary process is normally
not completely conscious or under our conscious control.
It is a particular identity which we have adopted and which
may be hard to change even if we want to. Also, primary
and secondary processes can flip back and forth, depending
upon what we are identifying with in a given moment.
We use certain channels as part of our primary and
other channels as part of our secondary processes. The
channels that we use in conjunction with our primary
process are called occupied channels. These we use
regularly with some degree of awareness. Occupied channels
can be determined by listening to the way in which we
use language, particularly by the use of the active verb
form. For example, sentences like “I see myself as a
business person” indicate that the visual channel is occupied
by ‘I* or by our primary process. An occupied movement
channel might be indicated by a statement such as
“Sometimes, I just jump out of my skin.” Occupied movement
can also be recognized when the movements, or
movement gestures, complete themselves, and also when
the movements closely mirror what the person is saying
verbally.
Unoccupied channels are aspects of our secondary
processes. These channels are not used with conscious
awareness. We determine unoccupied channels by noticing
the way we use verbs passively in our speech. In a therapeutic
context, phrases like “people are looking at me”
indicate an unoccupied visual channel because other people
are doing the looking, not me. Unoccupied movement may
be detected in such sentences as “She can stand up to the
boss, but I can’t,” or “The tree bent in the wind.” Unoccupied
movement is also indicated by recurrent, spontaneous
and incomplete gestures, movement-oriented accidents, and
unintentional body motions.
It is important to notice unoccupied channels because
they give us the most rapid access to our deepest processes
by virtue of the fact that they are very far away from what
we are allowing ourselves to notice. That is why encouraging
a client to use an unoccupied movement channel by
simply standing up, can reveal both her or his entire life
history and current process in the space of a few seconds.
Process work embraces secondary experiences as the
seeds of new life and helps them unfold through the technique
of amplification. Amplification means strengthening
a signal in the particular channel in which an experience is
occuring in order to bring out its full message. My client,
for example, amplified her movement first by putting her
focus on it, then by standing up and using her whole body,
then by making a face which mirrored her movement and
finally by creating a dance. Processes can be unfolded in
great depth by using the technique of changing channels,
or adding on other channels. In this example, I asked the
woman to change channels by making sounds which mirrored
her movements. I then encouraged her to switch
channels once again and create a visual image of her experience
in her mind, which she further developed into a
story.
Differentiating Movement
The differentiation of movement into primary and
secondary movements has been extremely helpful to me in
going beyond my own movement repertoire and delving
deeply into my own and my clients’ “dreaming” processes.
Primary movements are intentional and congruent with our
momentary identity. We understand them, they make sense
to us. In the example of my client, her intense and direct
motions are primary because they mirror her primary intention
to talk seriously about her problems.
Secondary movements are unintentional, spontaneous
and incongruent with our primary identity. These secondary
movements are dream-like communications which are
mysterious and surprising. They do not complete themselves,
and we do not readily understand them. Secondary
movements are like the beginning of a sentence which
stops in mid-air! They have a tendency to repeat themselves
until we notice them and help them unfold. A
secondary movement in my client’s process occurred when
she threw her sweater in the air. The quality of this movement
was incongruent with her primary intention.
It is not easy to recognize these secondary movements
and stay with them, although this can be one of the goals
of improvisational and creative dance. Unintentional
movements can happen very rapidly like a quick stumble, a
shrug of the shoulders, or a movement tic. It is all too
easy to fool ourselves and focus on those aspects of our
movements which we like or favor, and to ignore or simply
not notice those aspects which we do not understand, or
which are distasteful, fleeting, strange, unintentional or
different from the way we have identified ourselves. We
might get attached to moving in a certain way and ignore
secondary movements which momentarily disrupt our
primary movement flow.
Noticing primary and secondary movements that occur
while we are speaking or moving, and focusing on them
with awareness not only leads to more creative options but
also minimizes movement injuries. We have found that
because secondary processes have a tendency to amplify
and repeat themselves in order to be known, forewarnings
of movement injuries can be seen in tiny, secondary movement
signals.
The Edge
Central to process oriented movement awareness is the
ability to notice movement “edges.” The edge is the
boundary between primary and secondary processes. It
appears when something new arises and we are confronted
with the boundaries of our known world.
The edge appears in movement when we begin to
explore a secondary movement and suddenly stop, become
confused, giggle, or doubt the value of our experience. If
we continue to move, we may subtly revert back to our
primary process movement theme. All of our fears and
beliefs which forbid us to explore new territory arise at the
edge. Remember the woman in the example? She stopped
at one moment, became shy and doubted her experience.
She was perched at the edge of something new, something
unknown. This woman only needed a bit of encouragement
to go over her edge and explore a new world. But
always take care to watch which way the process wants to
flow! At times it might be necessary to go more deeply
into the belief systems which stop us from exploring secondary
signals before attempting to go over the edge.
If you are moving and feel that your movement is
repeating itself or if you feel bored, you might check out if
you missed an edge. At this point you might ask yourself
“Where was the last point of energy?” The answer to this
question may lead you right back to the moment when a
secondary movement appeared but was let go of.
The edge can be very elusive. I remember watching
two women moving together in a very fluid way.
They faced one another, palms together, and rocked
smoothly back and forth. This was their primary
movement process. As they moved, however, there
were very slight pushes with their hands which
were incongruent with the rhythm and force of the
rest of their movement. Here was an edge to notice
and explore. When encouraged to follow these
pushes, they began to wrestle, challenged one another
and enjoyed feeling their strength.
Metaskills
I have just mentioned a number of process oriented
tools. Yet, process work, or any therapeutic method, is
more than a set of technical skills. The art of process
work also includes what I am calling metaskills—feeling-
oriented attitudes which accompany and enhance techniques.
The way in which we work with ourselves and
others, the way we approach numinous and mysterious
movements, is a matter of feeling. Certain metaskills and
feelings make it possible to open up to new experiences
and value our stream of experience.
Whether working with herself or with others, a process
worker compassionately embraces both those elements of
experience which are close to awareness and those which
are farther away, which are unknown and surprising. She
creates a nurturing vessel in which even the tiniest secondary
signals can grow. She does not throw away disturbing
or surprising experiences but recycles them, providing a
fertile soil in which they can develop. She also needs the
metaskill of courage to make room for new aspects of life
to emerge when consensus reality seems to forbid them.
She will use the metaskills of creativity and playfulness as
well as the Zen ‘beginner’s mind’ which do not prejudge
experiences but allow them to explain themselves as they
unfold. She sensitively explores the edge and notices in
which direction the river wants to flow. And perhaps most
importantly, she must have a basic movement orientation
which fluidly adapts to the unique changes and surprises in
any given process.
The Dreambody and the Dreaming Process
Let’s return to the development of process work and
the connection between movement and body symptoms.
Amy made a fascinating discovery many years ago. At
that time, he was a Jungian analyst in Zurich, Switzerland
and believed very strongly in Jung’s idea that our dreams
are meaningful expressions of our inner lives. Jung approached
dreams like a medieval alchemist. He took the
dream (the alchemists would call it ‘prima materia’), focused
on it (or put it in a pot so to speak) and with appreciation
and dedication cooked the contents until they instructed
us about our lives (turned to gold!). Amy wondered
if the same attitude could be applied to body symptoms.
What would it be like to follow body experiences as
if they were potentially meaningful?
During that time, Arny had a client who was dying
of stomach cancer. After an operation, and while
still under partial anesthesia, the man told Amy in
an excited, almost elated, tone that his tumor was
still growing. Though Arny reassured the man that
his tumor had just been removed, the man insisted
that it was still growing and began to make movements
that pushed out and expanded his stomach.
Wanting to validate this man’s experience, yet worried
that continuing this movement might burst the
man’s stitches, Arny encouraged him to change
sensory-oriented channels by translating this movement
experience into a visual picture.
The man reported that he saw a picture of fireworks
and suddenly said, “Oh, but that is what I
dreamed the other night! I dreamed that there was
an explosion of fireworks on Independence Day and
that that would be my healing!” In other words,
the experience he had in his body was mirrored in
his dream. This man was ordinarily quite shy.
Arny helped him to explode his sense of shyness by
becoming more expressive in his everyday life. He
lived much longer than expected. (See Arny’s
Working with the Dreaming Body, 1984.)
From this experience and countless others, Amy developed
the concept of the dreambody: the idea that our
secondary body experiences and our night-time dreams
mirror each other. In fact, this example shows that we do
not only dream at night but that our bodies are dreaming
all of the time in our sometimes disturbing, mysterious and
unintentional secondary body signals and movements. We
need only notice these experiences throughout the day and
help them unfold in order to tap into our on-going dreaming
process.

The Neglected Channel

In industrialized cultures, the movement channel is
often unoccupied. Furthermore, for most people, even for
some of us trained in movement, it may be unusual to learn
to use out awareness to follow unintentional movement
pnvesses. Many people learn to walk and move properly.
Kit not to follow then unique, mysterious, often unpredictable
movement signals.
There are numerous examples which I could give from
our process oriented movement clinics (led by Kate Jobe,
Nisha Zenoff, Amy and myself) or the Lava Rock body
symptoms clinics (led by Amy, Max Schuepbach and staff)
on the Oregon coast. The following example occurred
during a session with a woman with cerebral palsy at a
Lava Rock clinic. It illustrates the difference between
“learned” and “spontaneous” movement
The woman came to the center of the room in order
to focus on her movement process. She began to
work with Arny as other seminar participants
looked on. She said that she had cerebral palsy
from birth. She also said that she was interested in
a childhood dream she had had in which she was
with her family in a castle and everyone was having
a really happy and fun time together. (Arny’s research
has shown that childhood dreams are connected
to life myths and chronic symptoms).
The woman continued to explain that in order to
move somewhere, she must first concentrate very
exactly on where she wants to go and only after
careful deliberation is she able to begin to move in
that direction. She said that this sort of concentration
is very tiring but that nevertheless this is the
way she had learned to get through life. This is her
primary way of moving, her intention and means of
getting along with her movement process.
In order to stay close to her physical movement
process, and hopefully in this way to find out more
about her dream, Arny asked her how she would
move if she did not concentrate on where she wanted
to move but allowed her body to move in its own
natural way. He was asking about her secondary
movement experience. The woman was excited to
find out what would happen but afraid that she
might fall. Amy encouraged her to sit on the floor
and to experiment from this safe position.
She sat down, closed her eyes, and followed her
natural movement tendencies. Arny sat with her so
she would not feel alone and helped her to follow
her movement. She began to sway back and forth,
and started to crawl sideways across the floor. She
then wanted to try this movement standing up.
Others from the seminar stood around her in case
she lost her balance. She started to move sideways
and her motions began to transform as she added a
slight lilt, a kind of light, rhythmic quality to her
motions as she moved and swayed from side to side.
She began to laugh and laugh. She said, “Oh, this
is so much fun! It is so easy! I don’t have to work
hard!” Amy joined her in her movement as they
played and experimented with this movement.
Encouraged to allow the movement to unfold
further, the vooman's fingers began to snap, her
head bobbed back and forth, and she started to hum
a jazz tune. Her body bopped from side to side and
she danced freely and sublimely. The rest of the
group spontaneously started to sing and celebrate
and joined her in her dance. She said it was like
being with a happy family and suddenly recalled
her childhood dream!
By following the natural tendency in this woman’s
chronic movement process and allowing it to unfold, she
entered into her dreaming process, discovered her childhood
dream, her connection to others and a splendid, magical
dance. This experience was the beginning of a new
way for her to live in her body and the world.


Quick Access to the Dreaming Process through
Movement

Interestingly enough, we have found that because
movement is far from awareness (unoccupied) for many
people, it gives us quick access to the dreaming process,
for it is in those places that we have least awareness the
the dreaming process comes up most rapidly. Simply
asking someone to walk around the room and to notice the
movements she or he is making which are “not simply
walking” can be the beginning of unfolding the dreaming
process!
I remember an elderly professional man who
was the head of a social agency and had developed
programs in many places around the world. As he
talked about his work he glowed. He had decided,
however, that it was time for him to retire. He
complained that he had weakness in his left leg.
He had already explored and taken care of the
medical causes for this weakness and was interested
in finding out more about this movement difficulty.
Amy and / asked him to walk around the room
and notice anything that “wasn’t just walking.’’ He
said that he noticed that his left leg was slower in
recovering its step than his right. With our encouragement
the man slightly amplified or exaggerated
the slowness of this leg. He focused intensely on
his experience as if in meditation. He bent even
further down on his left knee and then stepped up to
his right.
Suddenly, the man walked over to one of the
seminar participants, bent down all the way to the
ground and bowed his head. He repeated this
motion several times until he knew why he was
bowing. He finally said, “I am giving respect, I am
a servant.” He continued, “Wow, I thought I
should retire because of my age, but actually / am
excited about going back to work and doing more
for people and the world!"
This man’s movement difficulty was not only pathological
but a meaningful aspect of his process. By asking him
to walk around the room and amplify that aspect of his
movement which was “not just walking,” he unfolded the
experience in his leg and discovered his desire to continue
in his role as a servant of the people.
Movement and Coma Work
As process work began to develop and a school began
in Zurich and in Portland, Oregon, it branched out into
many areas. But one area which has been most significant
in my life has been the work with people in comatose
states. Movement and other forms of nonverbal communication
are important in coma work because people in these
altered states of consciousness do not relate in ordinary
verbal ways. We have found that individuals in comatose
conditions feel they are being intimately related to when
we are able to enter into their communication system.
Coma work involves noticing even the most minute movements
and signals, following and helping them unfold.
An extensive description of process oriented coma work
can be found in Amy’s Coma: The Dreambody Near
Death. Let me briefly mention however, a few of the
movement signals which we have seen in coma work. For
example, the signal of a head turned slightly to the side
can, when amplified and encouraged, transform into the
gesture of a child putting its cheek forward, so to speak,
hoping for a caress. I have seen how the apparently spastic
motions of the arms of a comatose person become the
beginning of a wrestling match! In the same way, the
slightest movements of a finger or a hand have transformed
into the response to an imaginary embrace from a lover. A
heaving of the chest and gasping for breath became, from a
person near death, the singing of the inner child.


Conclusion

Process oriented movement awareness requires the
ability to differentiate intentional movements from unintentional
ones and to perceive edges. By embracing those
aspects of our movement experience which are far from
our awareness, which are unknown and mysterious or
“secondary,” and unfolding these through amplification and
channel changing, we discover our on-going dreaming
process, night or day. In so doing, we break through
consensus reality revealing our own unexplored worlds. ★

----------------

STILL MOVING Contact Improv. shop talk and dialogue


I am wanting to share with you
something that came up at the West
Coast Contact Dance Festival last
summer in Berkeley, California, organized
by myself, Leigh Hollowell and
Lori B. It was a fantastic event of
sharing, teaching, learning, and expanding.
And there was an undercurrent
rumble of slight what?, discontent?,
challenge? It took the form of some
students expressing the feeling that
there was too much distinction being
made between students and teachers.
That the “hierarchy” was inappropriate.
Now, we all have a fairly negative
charge on that “H” word and so I found
myself looking at this interesting development
and wondering if this kind of
grumbling is going on elsewhere.
I think there is a bit of confusion for
students new to the form—especially
those coming from a more “new age”
approach—that this is a form that everyone
and anyone can do—that there
Roll by Tica Lemos, imprinted in sand. 
Alcantara, Maranhao, north of Brasil.
should not be such distinctions between
levels of skill, that “hierarchy” is automatically
bad.
I found this disturbing. I am considering
sending out copies of Steve
[Paxton]’s answer to—who was it? a
few issues ago, when he discussed the
parenthood of the form and the need for
disciplined practice over time [“Hier-
Visibility,” CQ 14:1, Winter 1989].
It also raised, for us the organizers,
the question of time spent in the community
and the maturation process that
occurs over time—not just acquisition
of skills but a deeper understanding and
connection with both the form and the
people practicing it.
Can there be a hierarchy that is not
about elitism? I hope so—and I am
wondering if others are asking the same
or similar questions.

by Anne Aronov

--------------------

The Point Reyes Studies Project

by Libby Witzel


I had the privilege of participating in
the Point Reyes Studies Project this
year, March 29 to April 3, 1994, in
Point Reyes, California. Organized by
Stephanos Georgantis and Ray Chung,
the Point Reyes Project is a gathering of
a group of improvisors from the Bay
Area (and this one adopted Easterner) to
explore, discuss, create and perform
improvisation. We were: Anne Aronov,
Ray Chung, Jess Curtis, John Doyle,
Stephanos Georgantis, Rachel Kaplan,
Jo Kreiter, Chris Mathias, Stephanie
Maher, Andy Meier, Carol Swann, John
Weaver, Scott Wells, and myself, Libby
Witzel.
We met for two preliminary evenings
at the Zaccho Studio in San Francisco
to generate ideas, interests, desires,
to clarify our focus for the project
and find out who we are as a group.
Our discussion began by questioning the
effect an audience has on improvisation:
What is the difference between inner
presence and outer presence? What
happens in the transition between soloing
and duet? Between soloing internally
and soloing externally? Longevity
and Feedback were other interests
raised. And for this displaced Easterner,
the question—is there a difference between
East Coast and West Coast Contact?
We worked in Point Reyes for three
days, practicing various scores which
involved dancing for each other and
giving feedback. In small groups, one
person soloed while the others spoke out
loud to the dancer about what they saw,
experienced, and witnessed as they
watched them move.
My personal favorite was our accumulation
score. Solo watches solo
mover, gives feedback, reverse roles.
These two soloists become a duo, duo
watches another duo, gives feedback,
reverse roles. These two duos become
a quartet, quartet watches another quartet,
gives feedback, reverse roles. These
two quartets become an octet, octet
watches octet, gives feedback, reverse
roles. The two octets join, perform
together for the rest of the group, the
audience gives feedback. Remy Charlip
honored us with his presence as we
worked—our grandfather, our timekeeper,
our overseer.
Evenings consisted of large quantities
of food and long discussions about
our sexiest moments on stage, sexuality
issues in Contact, and sexuality in general
on the West Coast vs. the East
Coast. What a delicious feast it all was.
Our work culminated in a performance,
“Defying Gravity,” on Easter Sunday at
the Dance Palace in Point Reyes. Our
audience was small, but it was reward
enough to be brilliant for each other.
When it was all over we went for a
short walk on the beach, and then
everyone headed back to the city. I got
in my car and headed East.

--------------------

The Diverse Dance Research
by Karen Nelson


Retreat took place February 19 to 26,
1994 at Camp Sealth, a rustic facility on
Vashon Island in Washington State. It
was organized by myself, Karen Nelson,
with the assistance of Joan Hanna and
Scott Smith. I had envisioned it as an
ideal meeting place where the work of
dance between disabled and non-disabled
people could be explored in detail;
each person bringing their own ideas for
research and for ways to spend one
week in a rural retreat environment.
From New Mexico, Europe, New
York, Oregon, Boston, Texas, California,
Idaho, Vermont and Vashon Island/
Seattle we were quite a varied population
of teachers, performers, students,
community organizers, sign language
interpreters, physical therapists and
dancers. There was a variety of physical
abilities and so-called disabilities
including people with cerebral palsy,
visual impairment, quadriplegia, postpolio
syndrome, deaf-blindness, single
leg amputation and speech and motor
function impairment due to head injury.
There were mostly adults, one child, and
a visit by some local kids. Also some
of us rehearsed in public for a local
elementary school, reaping beautiful
artwork in response.
For many participants it was a place
to meet and to network. It was also an
opportunity to consider the activity of
self-generated research and how to use
time constructively. Some people came
knowing what they wanted to focus on,
others wanted to see what would come
up at the site. Some people set about
working individually, some in small
groups, others wanted to function as a
larger group—making a group decision
on how to spend the time after all the
ideas had been put on the table. Ultimately,
there was enough room for all
ways to co-exist.
The dance form of contact improvisation
was a uniting factor. We
warmed-up and jammed together often.
Live, improvised music was constantly
inspiring. Many of the class offerings
centered on contact improv and also
included work with vision, rolling mobility,
ASL (American Sign Language),
Nora Haj s and Sonny BoyArdee engaged i some research at breakfast.

group scores, sounding, and a “no language”
morning emphasizing communication
without known languages.
We had an informative session with
Sue Polland about injury prevention and
potential hazards of movement for people
with specific limitations.
There were many discussions.
David Sampson and Lori B initiated one
on “Hierarchy and Bias.” The following
list of stereotypes of disabled people
was made during that discussion, which
included both disabled people (DP) and
able-bodied people (AB).
Stereotypes: it’s hard for DP to do
things, they cannot speak for themselves,
they are ugly and physically
disgusting, mentally retarded children
are cute, disabled people are inspirations,
DP are really children (so can
behave like children), DP’s needs are
endless, DP are too dependent, disabilities
are contagious, people with
cerebral palsy are more disabled
than paraplegics, disabled people are
hard to communicate with, are delicate,
can’t compete with/match ABs,
can’t live without ABs, DP hold me
back, DP are easily offended, DP are
easy to take advantage of and get
away with it, DP are incompe-
tent/hold only menial jobs, DP are
always happy or always sad, DP are
just disabled people.
Julie Joyce, a dancer who directs
Buen Viaje Dancers of Santa Fe, NM,
an integrated performance company of
people with various physical and mental
abilities and disabilities, brought up the
question of why there aren’t more people
with developmental disabilities
present at ‘danceability’ workshops.
Pointing out a barrier there.
Riley Ford is a 10 year old boy who
is deaf and blind. His world is a place
where movement and touch are the
primary sources of stimulation and
information. His mother, Joyce Ford,
told us he was introduced to dance
about a year ago by dancer and sign
language interpreter, Harriet Jas-
tremesky from Idaho. Harriet also
works with Riley in the classroom and
it was she who suggested they come to
Diverse Dance. They wanted to videotape
Riley dancing with different people
in order to show his movement choices
while dancing and how he expresses
himself. Joyce is an activist for deaf-
blind rights and awareness and she
travels extensively lecturing to parents
of deaf-blind children. Joyce told us
that Riley’s world is based on touch,
without touch he doesn’t exist.
Many of us became tired of the
word disabled and it was a relief when
Alito Alessi came up with the idea to
write the word “DISABILITY” with a
slashed circle around the letter “D,”
thereby slashing the notion of unwholeness:

D^Tisability

Finally, a public presentation entitled
mlxEd UP: a dance performance
celebrating the diversity of the human
body, provided the opportunity to view
and explore creative work. I was blown
away by the work of Augustino Dance
Theater from Oakland, California. In
particular, there was a duet performed
by Grace Lin and Augustos Ferriols,
created by Slobodan Dan Paich and
Augustos Ferriols, in which Grace,
whom we had previously seen in a solo
wheelchair dance, is now “standing” full
height in her grand ballgown gracefully
dancing a “Zen Waltz” with her adoring,
tights-clad, seemingly not disabled,
male partner. A bittersweet image of
immobility and freedom of movement
and love.
There were several other works
created during the retreat. Another
strong memory for me is a piece directed
by Bonnie Dunn, “Hear No... See
No...Speak No,” for three disabled
women (Bonnie, Kum Hee Hong, Karen
Ryan) who all appear sitting on three
white boxes. Gradually they move off
the boxes and their unique and amazing
styles of locomotion reveal their “different”
bodies, easily forgotten for a moment
when they form a three-headed
totem pole. I love watching human
bodies move, and to witness diversely
shaped bodies that initiate movement in
unusual patterns and timings is very
refreshing. 


--------------------

and Touchdown Dance

by Katy Dymoke

Touchdown Dance is a project based
in England that teaches Contact Improvisation
to integrated groups of people
with and without visual impairment. It
was co-founded in 1986 by Steve Paxton
and Anne Kilcoyne, who remained its
directors until 1994, when the directorship
was passed to Katy Dymoke. [Eds.]
In July 1994, Anne Kilcoyne
left for America to start a new life.
She left behind boxes of addresses,
papers, and tapes. I have a summer to
browse through, digest it all and start
to cultivate a company. Touchdown
has carried out a great deal of research,
beautiful work, to enable dance
to be accessible to those without sight.
From 1989 to 1993,1 worked in
Denmark with deaf-blind and visually
impaired people through the Performance
Training Workshop which I cofounded.
P.T.W. offered vocational
training and workshops in the performing
arts for adults with and without
disabilities.
The group that I worked with the
most was the deaf-blind, whose communication
system is through touch,
and so have fewer taboos about physical
contact. One of the men in the
group, Torben Hansen, determined
from the start that this dance was a
natural extension of his own body
language, and we achieved huge progress
working together.
A performance was created with
Torben taking a major role. In this
performance, signs were integrated
into the movement, so the dance spoke
to those who couldn't hear the music.
We invited blind people in the audi-
oiw to come onto the stage prior to
the sIk'
nv and touch our costumes, fed
the set. .mi identify each person in
terms of height, and shape. Having
blind people m the audience of a
dance piece was no longer an issue, as
they enjoyed the experience, the music,
and the descriptions which enabled
them to receive the poetry.
We worked in good-sized rooms,
with wooden floors, as the sensing of
a good floor is of paramount importance
when doing contact improvisation.
No doubt we had much fun:
spontaneous ripples of laughter as we
got tied up, and gasps as we achieved
the next lift or roll or simply had a
good move.
I was taught sign language, their
language became ours, and the collaboration
became real. The communication
barrier was soon broken, time
became dilated, and four years rolled
by. Videos of the process show the
reality: that a form that in its essence
is pure and in its process non-discrim-
inatory, is effectively enabling those
previously excluded from knowing a
dance form that compliments their
bodies, to now benefit and have a
better quality of life. P.T.W. continues
today, run by disabled artists.
This is not evangelical: Torben
now walks tall, no longer has periodic
depressions, and has attained employment
with the telephone company,
teaching other deaf-blind to use the
equipment. The joy of dance gave
him a new dimension, enriched his
desire to be physical in life, with
others, just as it does for me. The
story is not unknown, we all know it,
let’s continue enabling others to know
it too.
I am continuing the work here in
the U.K. with physically disabled, and
I hope to raise money for a performance
I have named “Skin”—since
dancing with Nancy Stark Smith in
Penrith I wish to focus on the “skin-
esphere,” to discover it! With thanks
to Steve Paxton and Anne Kilcoyne, I
look forward to crossing the Atlantic
to meet you ‘guys." and those I met
in Copenhagen. once more.

--------------------

DanceAbility

by Alito Alessi, Alice Tallmadge

DanceAbility is an integrated workshop
in contact improvisation dance for
physically disabled and non-disabled
people. It is directed by Alito Alessi.

The 7th Annual DanceAbility
Workshop was held at the University
of Oregon in Eugene, Oregon, March 4
to 6, 1994. The workshop opened with
a lecture-demonstration on Friday evening,
followed by two days of experiential
workshops and a performance on
Saturday night.
This year’s project demonstrated
increased sophistication in staff organization
and teaching methods. We attribute
this to a staff orientation meeting,
where goals for the workshop, as well
as an inner structure to facilitate achieving
those goals, were created.
This year’s staff was made up of
disabled and nondisabled teachers and
performers, including Alito Alessi, Emery
Blackwell, Lori B, Bonnie Dunn,
Kumhee Hong, Bruce Jackson, Anne
Kilcoyne, Bill McKinlay, Karen Nelson
and Steve Paxton. At the planning
meeting, the staff shared how they saw
their individual work in reference to the
development of the DanceAbility work
as a whole. We decided what was
necessary to include in the workshop,
and prepared a “menu” outlining the
various exercises that would be included
during the workshops, and who would
lead them.
A significant component in the creation
of the menu was to create a “web”
of support that would extend throughout
the weekend. During the exercises, staff
members who weren’t teaching acted as
“satellites,” offering one-on-one instruction,
explaining exercises or facilitating
people’s explorations. The main task of
the “satellites” was to maintain and
contain the outer edges of the “web.”
Each workshop session began and ended
with staff and participants forming a
circle, where thoughts, feelings and
feedback were shared.
Also included in this year’s staff
was a facilitator who was both involved
in the project and acting as an “outside
observer.” The facilitator agreed to
make both an oral and written evaluation
of the project at its completion.
The plan for the written report was that
it solidify the vision of this work and
make it usable in future teaching efforts.
Workshop Sessions
The initial workshop circle included
an introduction to and explanation of
the philosophy behind this work—
building common ground, creating
community, communicating and respecting
limits. Time was then provided for
personal introductions where people
could share information about themselves
concerning any physical, emotional
or other limitations.
After the opening circle, the morning
consisted of warm-ups involving
spatial and sensory exploration. (Composer
Suse Millimon provided live music
during Saturday and Sunday using a
synthesizer, guitar and drums.) After
the warm-ups, basic contact improvisation
skills such as counterbalancing,
following the point of contact, and
weight transfers were introduced The
first session ended with guided open
dancing and a closing circle.
After lunch was another opening
circle, then an exercise incorporating
simple bodywork according to each
individual’s abilities. The suggested
bodywork forms included rocking, pressure,
compression, rolling and stretching.
The rest of the afternoon included
working with various scores (such as
dancing solos with people watching,
then replaying solos for each other),
followed by a rather energetic round
robin and a closing circle.
This same “menu” was followed on
Sunday.
The DanceAbility Performance
This year’s DanceAbility Performance
was greatly expanded over last
year’s to showcase the continued
growth and diversity of work in the
field of integrated dance. Besides
showcasing staff performers, the program
included members of the San
Francisco-based AXIS Dance
Troupe—Bonnie Lewkowicz, Thais
Mazur, David Russell, Uli Schmitz,
Lynelle Sjoberg and Judith Smith.
Other performers included Bjo Ash-
will, lone Beauchamp, Karen Daly,
Nora Hajos, Dirk Poquestoferri, Wendy
Ruble and Gweneth Van Frank.
The performance included live
music, original choreography, group
improvisations, duets, and solos. Karen
Nelson led an audience participation
intermission event that used blindfolds,
sound effects and touch to give the
audience the chance to experience dance
on different sensory levels. The performance
was sign and audible-interpreted.
Note: DanceAbility T-shirts are
available!

---------------------

The Man in the Box - Interview with Steve Paxton


by Jess Curtis


 
The following interview took place
at the Spring ’94 Breitenbush Jam Conference
on “Contact Improvisation: The
Form,’’ at Breitenbush Hot Springs in
Oregon. The interview was conducted
using a score set up by the interviewee,
Steve Paxton. Written questions were
given to Steve, who sat in a small box at
one end of the space, out of our view.
Steve responded in writing and each
questioner read to the conference their
question and answer from Steve.
While this was going on, the rest of
the people in the room participated in
an energetic discussion on topics ranging
from the varying styles of Contact
practiced in various parts of the world
(e.g., West Coast, East Coast, Germany,
Quebec) to issues of economic accessibility
and ethics and values within the
Contact community.
The weave of these two separate and
related discussions was rich and engaging.
I have taken the liberty of putting
the questions in an order, for they came
to me in a pile. I did not credit individual
questioners (except in one case
where it seemed relevant), because not
everyone identified themselves on their
papers.

ORIGINS / Cl
What led you to invent the form we
call Contact Improvisation?
Steve: Having noticed it (I did not
invent anything but the name and a
process to study it), I noticed the form
evolved. What do you mean by the
form? A physical practice by individuals?
Duets? The above evolved into a
network.
What role does perception play in the
form? Is Cl a state of mind? If so
can you define that state?
Every discipline begins with perception.
States of mind are caused by
perceptions and/or states of mind determine
perceptions.
Cl is an improvisational state of
mind partially determined by another’s
improvisational state of mind; the contact
is not a state of mind but a physical
exterior event. The two blend like the
double circles of ripples seen when two
stones are dropped in a pond.
Do you think Cl is evolving as a
form? How?
Yes. 1. Socially inclusive. 2. Technically.
a) Why do you think people have
such a longing/desire to do Cl?
b) Do you think it’s possible that, by
practicing Cl, the physical body
changes towards an addiction to
physical contact?
a) Touch is essential to development
of the infant’s health, nurture, mental
development, emotional maturing.
Many people have not received enough,
or continue to benefit from the way it
works on the adult body.
b) “Addiction?” Are we addicted to
preferring fresh air or healthy food?
Are there books and tapes on contact
improvisation? What are they? How
do I get better?
By practice. Books and tapes give
ideas about what possible ways one
might aim practice. But the first part of
practice is physical. The magazine
Contact Quarterly contains most info.
Is there a difference between practice
and discipline?
Not in practice.
You said earlier that Cl is evolving
technically... Could you elaborate,
i.e., What specifically do you see as
technical advancements? Do you
teach this in duet work?
I teach it in solo work and I will not
elaborate on paper but only physically
in the studio.
How do you feel about Cl being
“used” in the new dance/post-modern
dance field?
Who cares?
Would any other form of dance help
with the skills of Cl?
All.
THE SMALL DANCE
What is the “Small Dance”?
Tuned to gravity, reflexes arrange
our skeletons, aligning weights and
proportions to maintain our stand.
Noticing the Small Dance gives the
mind a way to tune to the speed of
reflex.

Are all involuntary movements part
of the Small Dance?
Movements of the skeleton.
In the Small Dance, is the teetering
upright equilibrium sought only a
mechanical one of weights, levers and
muscle motors, or does the psyche
also attempt to find expression and
recognition of its own states in the
tensing and releasing of the stander’s
musculature?
The small dance is only the first
definition you give here. The second is
the study of such techniques as the
“imagine you are taking a step with
your left foot...” sort. Separating these
two is instructive. (My theory is that
we learn a lot by contrast.) In practice
they interact.
Are breath and heartbeat a Small
Dance?
They are further, but other, manifestations
of an aspect of mind to which
consciousness is denied direct access,
yet may infer by such evidence.
Did the “Small Dance” get created
before Cl, the form, or after?
Before.
What stage of your dance life were
you in then (what were you most
being influenced by)?

Dance: Aikido, meditation, gymnastics,
improvisation technique, NY urban
tension, art as abstract, “form” as principle
control, the work of Simone Forti, a
remark by Agnes Martin—“The only
thing left of nature in NYC is gravity.”
If there is a standing small dance, is
there a sitting small dance?
Yes, half as long.
Can the Small Dance be refined? If
so, what are die indicators?
Creamy but fine-grained elastic
scope of movement.
I don’t know how to teach people to
let their small dance get bigger like
mine. [This question came from Emery
Blackwell, who has cerebral palsy.]
Your example is contagious.
a) Dear dr. box, is there a difference
between dance and movement?
b) If so, if a person cannot feel their
skeleton (paralysis or inattention) are
they still in the small dance?
a) Dame Peggy von Praugh reportedly
said, “It is only dance if it is en
pointe. ”
b) They are of it but not in it.

FAITH IN THE FORM

Do you ever lose faith in the form? If
so, what have you done to find your
way back?
No, I don’t lose faith in it, but I lose
understanding of it sometimes. I clear
mind and look again. Breitenbush
helps, also.
Is Contact Improvisation a spiritual
practice? If so, how can its principles
most effectively inform right relations
in the world?
All dance is (due to momentary
awareness). That is why the church
kicked out dance as an accredited religious
art. Whether or not it is spiritual—aside
from that—it is a game which
requires two people to win. Extrapolate
from that.
What function does Cl serve in society
at large?
Starting in urban centers it replaces
the denatured physical life of the inhab-
itants/inmates. Spreading outward, it
inhabits a vacuum imposed by society’s
very real need to influence the physical
bodies of its members; slips the knots
of regimentation, releases directed focus
into peripheral, unknown, unknowable
and familiar old potential. A form to
re-identify touch in a manner so innocent
and righteous that it can fairly
transcend taboo.
What about metaphors...like for living?
What about them?
I realize the many many layers or
levels of occuring at the same time.
Looking at details, i.e. Small Dance,
dancing/process/improvising, i.e. giving
weight is giving weight—giving
center is giving self. Are you separate
from me or part of my dream?

Thank you.

--------------------------

Values and Contact Improv

by Carol Horwitz

Last March I attended the 12th annual Contact
Improvisation Jam held at Breitenbush Hot Springs in
Oregon. Following the jam was a conference dedicated to
both a physical and verbal discussion of “Contact Improvisation:
The Form” led by Karen Nelson. The “small dance,”
the physics of contact, teaching contact to high need youth,
and a discussion on the embedded values in Contact Improvisation
were among some of the topics explored.
The following report was gleaned from a transcript of the
discussion on values led by Lori B. Participants in the
discussion included, among others, Lori B, Brad Rothbart,
lone Beauchamp, Steve Paxton, Mary Ganzon, Libby Witzel
and myself.
Lori began the discussion with this thought:
“I experience some set of values every time a
community gathers to practice the form. There are
some remarkable similarities in people who get drawn
to practice the form and I think there are actually
some political values, maybe not intended to be a
fundamental part of the form, but that have somehow
become embedded in the form... As an example, I
would give the idea of inclusiveness... ”
Starting from this point, we proceeded to examine Contact
from a variety of perspectives, the first one historical. When
Steve Paxton invented(?) discovered(?) recovered(?) uncov-
ered(?) delivered(?) Contact Improvisation in the early 1970s,
our country was in a period of social unrest and change.
This manifested in a number of trends. Among them was the
challenging of dominant social values and sex, race and class
inequalities.
During this period, ideologies around touch were also
changing. Touch and the sensuality of touch were explored
as means of communication, not simply the prelude to a
sexual act. Contact Improvisation explored this territory of
touch communication directly. In our discussion, it was
stated that in Cl “successful” communication through touch
required that the dancers enter
“a listening state, listening to the self and to another
person on a deep, subtle level ” (lone Beauchamp)
This listening state was in sharp contrast to the presentational
focus of most western theatrical dance. A listening
state was achieved by having the dancers slow down their
movements in order to take an internal focus.
"Rightfrom the beginning there nus a commitment to
explore the internal life of the body... * (Steve Paxton)
Dancing from the listening state created an unusual type
of short-term intimacy between the lived, danced, physical
body and someone or something outside the body.
"In the form there is u degree that you are intimate
because you are letting someone into a certain
space...and you let down by letting it be slow and not
being afraid of that. ” (Mary Ganzon)
Along with the freedom to touch and be intimate came an
agreement, an unwritten contract, which stated that the
privilege to touch would not be abused. (Abuse might
consist of using the dance for seductive and/or masturbatory
purposes.)
There was a great deal of disagreement in the group about
similarities and differences between a sensual experience and
a sexual one. Using a broad definition of sensuality, a
sensual experience might be had with another dancer, but
could also be experienced when dancing alone or with the
floor. Some felt that the individual could choose to be
sensual without being sexual.
“You sense your bones, you sense your muscles, you
sense sexual feelings and you choose where to place
your focus. ” (Carol Horwitz)
However, regardless of the intention of Contact teachers
and dancers, in the practice of Cl sexual feelings do occur.
These feelings may not get addressed within the Contact
community, which can result in an unhealthy atmosphere of
denial.
Contact was discussed as a sport/game. Rather than the
typical win/lose situation of sports, Contact was seen as a
game where “it takes two people to win” (Steve).
It was agreed that inclusivity was a primary Contact
value. Contact can be done with any BODY. A Contact
dance arises from the meeting point, the ’’common ground,”
between any two bodies regardless of their dance experience,
size, shape, sex, race or ablebodiedness.
It was also suggested that among Contact dancers there
was a “commitment to process” (Carol). Process takes place
in ‘biological” or “organic” time (Carol) or “erotic” time
(Lori) which is distinctly different from and often significantly
slower than linear clock time. The Contact dance moves
and matures at its own pace.
Many agreed that Contact put you in touch with your
“physical self and physical strength” in a way that other
movement forms did not. “The being in the body for me was
this elemental thing, central...,” someone added.
Contact’s power to integrate various parts of oneself was
recognized as a valuable result of practicing the form. For
many this integrated state was considered healing.
Inclusivity, an embracing of new social values that
emerged in the ’60s and '70s, openness to the intimacy of
touch, willingness to move slowly (or fast!) and listen,
respect for the Contact dance contract, physicality, noncompetitiveness,
process orientation and integrative and
healing potential were some of the values which we identified
as components of Contact I welcome additional thoughts
and feelings on the subject. These ideas and others from the
Contact community are forming the basis of my dissertation.

---------------------


Editor Note THE PEAKS OF VALLEY DANCING v20

The invitation from my local arts
council was to come together with a
group of local professional dancers to
collaborate, under the direction of a
postmodern choreographer, on the making
of a piece, to be performed in eight
weeks time on the stage of a beautiful
old theatre in town.
There were about seventeen of us in
all. Directors of companies and/or longstanding
teachers and performers, each
of us represented a different style of
dance practiced here in the “Pioneer
Valley” of western Mass.: tango,
modem, salsa, African, jazz, classical
Cambodian, ballet, contact improvisation,
belly dance, show dance, butoh,
intergenerational postmodern, and tap.
The idea was that we would share material
from our dance forms and from this
exchange a dance would be made.
I know that Contact and many other
new movement practices are not common
fare to the majority of dancegoers.
But through these weeks of rehearsal I
came to experience just how the work I
do deviates from traditional dance
forms: the spherical spacial orientation
(sometimes dancing inverted, any part of
the body touching the floor or partner),
the focus on touch as the central vehicle
for the dance form, the value given to
spontaneous invention and play, the
sense of extending your balance beyond
your own axis into a shared sphere of
action and support with a partner.
What could I communicate of contact
improvisation in this context? In the
first session of our small exchange
group, after showing some photos, talking
a little, and demonstrating my solo
use of weight (falling, rolling, inverting,
working off-balance), I thought why not
just start, improvise through touch,
weight, and movement, without further
preparation or explanation?
My first dance was with Gail, the
ballet teacher, and it consisted of her
cranking me mercilessly (I loved it) like
a plastic ballerina on top of an alarm
clock, in what she identified as “finger
turns,” me following, trying to keep up
with her touch and direction.
Next, I tried a back-to-back contact
dance with her, just a little easy leaning,
to get the weight blend that might serve
as ground for further exploring. The
moment she relaxed and gave weight,
she pulled away, excited, exclaiming,
“It’s therapeutic; Contact is therapeutic!”
If relaxation is therapeutic, then
yes, Contact is therapeutic. Does that
mean it’s not also dancing? We went
on... With her ballet shoes slipping on
the unrosined “modem dance” studio
floor, our first contact improvisation
was somewhat comical, frustratingly
fragmented and superficial, but a start.
At one point, the directors began
guiding us through exploratory amalgams:
try the Cambodian walk with the
butoh towel-carrying arms. Start with
the “contact” head reaching through the
sphere, and let that circling drop
through the body into the belly dance
hip circles, etc.
In rehearsal one day, we came up
with our own amalgam form. The
rules of the dance were that both dancers
would attempt to stay within then-
respective forms and dance together.
The resulting hybrid dances were, well,
bizarre, and very exciting to me.
When Gail volunteered to dance with
me, remembering our first finger turn
dance, I was curious what would happen.
To make and sustain physical
contact with her as she whirled around
her axis, merrily improvising ballet
combinations through the space, was no
easy task. I quickened my pace to keep
my body within range of her, to touch,
brush, jump past, fall in front of, synchronize
with her dancing. Finally she
began to seek me out too—or at least
consciously keep herself within my
reach—presenting me with her pirouettes
and waltz steps, her pique arabesques
and pas de bourses, as if to
see what I might do with them. I eventually
managed to dance my way into
her sphere and, feeling a lift coming—a
natural and easy extension -of the flow
of movement we were engaged in—I
signalled her through touch, and took
her up. In past weeks she probably
would have stiffened, but this time, her
eyes rolled back in her head, her head
fell back and she let me have her; legs
still extended, toes pointed, she flew
like an angel draped over a cloud.
“That was fun!” she exclaimed afterwards.
“But you know,” she confided
to me, “next time I think I’ll take more
responsibility.” Maybe Contact teaches
itself.
As I put myself in the hands of the
teachers, entered the body of then-
forms, I felt I was travelling: to the
courts of Europe where one danced to
please the king, to Asia, dancing to
honor the Gods.
Popping through the kinesphere of
my own small dance community into a
larger world of dancers was refreshing.
I felt carried in a kind of Noah’s Ark of
dance to a simple place where various
forms co-exist in the same garden; the
different species, life forms, cross-
pollinating where attracted to each
other, nevertheless remaining distinct.
A United Nations of dance, with no
need for headsets; understanding one
movement language made them all
intelligible, if unpronounceable.
The final piece was a series of ‘features’
in which dancers performed then-
dance style on its own amidst a variety
pf mixed-dance-language backgrounds,
stage crossings, and transitions to the
next feature. It was a real pleasure to
perform a straight-forward full-tilt contact
improvisation with a skilled and
sensitive partner, Stephen Yoshen, in a
crazy quilt piece made to be accessible
to a large general audience in my
hometown.
I think the arts council did me a big
favor. The project put news into my
body, showed me as I am, and gave me
the opportunity to consider what I’m
doing and how it meets other kinds of
dancing. It gave me an intimate experience
of other dance forms and the
working processes of the remarkable
dancers who do them.

by Nancy Stark Smith

---------------------

Letter from NY

by Douglas Dunn


Dear Friends,
Despite fervid preparations for our
upcoming New York season, and the
holidays’ invitation to immediate giving,
another voice says glance, Douglas,
over your shoulder, and report the
year’s dance happenings...
After the large-scale New York
production of Stucco Moon at LaMama
Annex, I began teaching technique and
composition classes in my studio. The
latter were sparsely attended, but consistently
so by the same interested
individuals, all of whom, in response
to the changing dance environment,
were facing crises about whether to
continue to dance, and if so how.
Often, as the afternoon sun worked its
way through the room in surprising
and beautiful ways, we fell to talking
instead of doing, about what dancing
had meant to us, could we get along
without it.
Inspired by their despair, I made
Disappearances. We worked in the
studio several weeks looking for the
threshold between what one could do
on the street that would remain invisible,
and what one might do that would
cross that threshold and catch a passerby’s
eye. Armed with our degrees of
visibility, and rules about how to respond
to situations we guessed might
come up as we walked the line between
performance and non-performance,
we took the work to two places
I’ve long thought suitable for open-air
work, the expanse on lower Broadway
next to the Marine Midland Bank,
where a twelve-foot high orange cube
by Noguchi sits on one of its tips, and,
a block east, the plaza in front of the
Chase Manhattan Bank, where an
eighteen-foot tall Dubuffet, read by
most as “mushroom-like,” or at least
“organic,” breaks with curves the
redundant right angles of the surrounding
architecture. Our plan was
to spend half an hour in the first
space, where most of the pedestrians
are moving through, the city’s quick
pace at full throttle, the second half
hour in the second, less a pathway,
more a retreat, where people stop to
sun, to eat a sandwich, to rest in the
satisfying expanse of the raised plaza,
away from the streets’ tumult.
Day one, stepping from the bus’s
frigid air into Manhattan’s summer
heat and humidity, I was alarmed to
see a guy in the first of the two spaces
already working the lunchtime crowd
with his dog. Sit, stand on your hind
legs, run a circle and come back, lie
supine and let this lady rub your belly.
How, with our delicate material, are
we going to compete with this, to
myself with knitted brow I moaned.
But quickly I recalled the spirit of our
work, and realized that this more conventional
performance suggested simply
that we adjust upward our threshold
of visibility. Eight of us or so
stood in one or another of our somewhat
realistic, somewhat stylized
poses against the windowed wall of
the bank, falling in and out of unison
as chance and choice would have it,
so that for the semi-circle of tourists
and lunch-breakers who had established
themselves as viewers of the
canine spectacle, we became an upstage,
off-hand corps de ballet.
It’s the kind of performing after
which you want to talk to your fellow
dancers in order to confirm your experience,
to verify fleeting impressions.
Did anyone else see the bank guard’s
face go from neutral to oh!, and feel
the same relief as he made no move to
stop us? Does anyone know the
young guy who joined in and gave off
a Hey-I-know-what-you ’re-doing-and-
I-can-do-it-better attitude? Did you
too tone down your material to point
up his arrogance without squelching
his participatory spirit?
On our last day a woman in black
was buzzing about, alternately taking
pictures and looking perplexed. A
dancer or two had asked if I knew her,
I didn’t, and said they had done what
we agreed, lied about our activity,
denying, when she asked them, that
we were performing. “No, my friends
and I work in the building right over
there, and we like to exercise on our
lunch hour.”
Suddenly I remembered that a
newspaperman had called asking about
the location of the event, unspecified
on the postcard advertising it. (As I
was not sure we wouldn’t, as we
increased our visibility from day to
day, be asked by security officers to
leave our chosen spaces, the card
asked that those who wanted to watch
call for our daily whereabouts. Also,
while not wishing to exclude friends
and fans, I didn’t want to attract in
numbers customary dance audience, as
the piece was for and about pedestrians
free from performance expectations,
and too much focused attention
was sure to blow our cover. We
averaged half a dozen intentional
viewers a show, some of whom, despite
my requests to the contrary,
insisted on approaching to converse.
A few blessed days we danced for the
unsuspecting only.)
I approached the lady in black and
with chagrin confirmed my suspicion.
She was frustrated, ready to blow.
She had been down the day before as
well, had seen nothing she thought to
be dancing, had gone back to her boss
who said No, you must return, look
again...then the dancers lying to her.
Part of her Leica began to look like a
silencer. To make amends, and, as it
was the end of the last day’s hour, to
give up with impunity our relative
invisibility, we performed for her in
unison our least reticent material, and
hope some day to see ourselves, dancers
gently disappearing into the black
hole of a Wall Street lunch hour, immortalized
on the pages of the Village
Voice. (I was told there might be
coverage next Spring in an article
featuring street dance.)
To jump back to May. For a week
of that splendid month, within eye and
nose shot of the fresh blossoms of
Washington Square Park, New York
University held a week-long conference
on the Beat Generation. That
dance is often excluded from lists of
the arts is a fact that makes some
movers who read sad... But, historically
speaking, Beat Dance there wasn’t.
None. So you wouldn’t expect the
conference to embrace such a category.
Moreover, during those seminal ‘50s,
just thirty miles south of North Beach,
I was being a proper student in a proper
high school. After sitting, full of
unexpressed yearning, through long
mornings in desk-chairs, I would move
through the afternoons, not along the
road, but toward the hoop, the net, the
goal. So my participation in this unlikely
event was itself equally unlikely.
As for the inclusion of the category,
everyone knows that the ball parks of
academia constructed in the last few
decades are missing left fields. That
is, no safe havens for omissions are
provided. (Or maybe it’s the entire
ball park that’s missing and we’re all
in left field.) The point is, someone
must have demanded equal time and
gotten it. And as for my presence at
the event, pure nepotism. So I found
myself sitting in the back of a jam-
packed Loeb Student Center abashedly
rehearsing un-hip thoughts for the Beat
Dance Panel while listening to half a
dozen professors of both genders and
many colors draw parallels between
Biblical and Beat literature. Fascinating,
and light years away in spirit from
Planet Beat.
As they concluded, and we mounted
the stage, the hall began to empty
out. Before, several hundred, now,
maybe twenty. Judith Malina, Living
Theater dynamo, described demonstrating
that very morning in Times Square
against the death penalty. Jean Erd-
man showed a video of an early solo,
exquisitely flowing. As our hour
neared its end, the hall began to fill
once again, in anticipation of the next
(non-dance) panel. I couldn’t help but
comment, then and there, through the
microphone, to all of them, the enthu-
siasts who had listened to us, and the
noisy arrivals, not angrily, more in
bemusement, on the symbolism of this
audience ebb and flow. I confined
myself to a description of what I saw,
the outflow for dance, the inflow for
words, but was thinking old thoughts:
Is dance the too difficult art? Or the
too simple? Too material? Less
translatable even than music to our
verbal confidence? That I voiced
what was obvious to all the panelists
pleased both our moderator, Joanna
Harris, master dance lover, teacher and
knower from Berkeley, and immediate
cause of my being there, and Miriam
Berger, head of Dance Education at
NYU, who a few months later offered
me a job teaching in her department.
To hang out one’s shingle is one
thing. Those who come to study have
chosen you from among other available
teachers, and are therefore fully
motivated. In the academy it’s another
story. Students may or may not
want dancing as a career, may or may
not consider you the right influence.
Wednesday evenings September
through December I spent three hours
with fifteen graduate students seeking
degrees that will help them get teaching
jobs in dance. The class was
billed as Improvisation, a word I eschew
as too loose for use. I was
nervous. By the end of the first class,
the challenge I expected, could I win
them, had been reversed, they had
won me. The better I got at walking
through the warm fall afternoons the
fifteen minutes to 35 West 4th Street
without trying to plan something other
than what had already been on my
body/mind as I had left my studio and
my own work process, the more fully
the class responded, and the more I
realized how much I was learning
from this experience with them.
Example: I spent one class working
on rhythm, insisting that they
make visible in their bodies meters
they had invented clapping, not as
easy a task as one might suppose.
Focusing on this skill in the class
tempted me to look again at the workings
of imagined and realized rhythms
in my own steps, and I decided to
focus on this element in the dance I
was making. I like to put my body in
motion and through trial and error find
a rhythm. Sometimes I sing, or count,
the aural structure acting as a grid
against which the moves take shape.
This double layer of information facilitates
remembering the movement and
communicating it to another dancer.
As I paid closer attention to the process,
I found there were notes in my
inner singing not in fact represented in
the movement. I stop, analyze, move
again, insisting on complete expression
of the sung rhythm. Sometimes a
blight, here stubbornness bears fruit in
the form of turns of phrase I otherwise
would not have come upon.
The piece I’m talking about, Caracole,
will be missing quite a few beats
if I don’t stop writing this letter and
go upstairs to the studio...
My happiest wishes to you for the
coming year.


---------------------
Improvisation Festival NY 95


by Daniel Lepkoff

A version of this letter was first printed in
the Movement Research Performance Journal
#10, winter!spring 1995, NYC.
What is IMPROVISATION? What
are people doing when they improvise?
What am I doing when I watch an
improvised performance or any performance
for that matter? These are questions
I found myself pondering during
and after attending a slew of improvised
performances hosted by the Third
Improvisation Festival/NY this past
December ’94.
My experience as an audience varied
widely with the viewing of different
works. -I have attempted to understand
how my perceptions and feelings relate
to the nature of each artist’s process. In
doing this I am making assumptions
which admittedly are personal, screened
through more than twenty years of experience
as an improviser. I’ve practiced
Contact Improvisation since 1972. I
have experimented with many approaches
to collaborative, ensemble work, and
I have a long term interest in developing
improvisation as a compositional medium
for making performance.
Often, during this festival, I felt an
empathy with the performers, a recognition
of various experiences one can have
while performing improvisation. I perceived
different types of work at various
points of development and maturity.
Above all I felt my own preferences
very strongly.
There were artists who appeared to
be in the midst of finding their work,
searching for a clear formulation of a
question. They were attempting to
identify a knowable field, a way of
working that resonates with their interests.
I felt Group 6 and perhaps Teri
Carter/Ione Beauchamp and group,
presented work at this stage of development
The nature of each of their improvisations
was complex. I perceived
a dual activity in the performer of both
searching for material, as well as improvising
within the material. There was
an underlying activity of scanning for a
way to enter, inhabit, embody, and
maintain “the work,” superimposed over
the more immediate involvement with
the physical work itself.
I can identify particularly with
Group 6 (Chris Aiken, Peter Bingham,
Jeff Bliss, Julie Carr, Ray Chung, Nancy
Stark Smith), a distillation of the
original group of eighteen of which I
was a part, that met during the first
Improvisation Festival/NY three years
ago.
Most of the members of Group 6
are expert practitioners of Contact Improvisation.
Yet it appeared that they
were not interested in performing Contact
Improvisation. I was not exactly
clear what they were working on. I
could see they had an interest in mapping
images in space. They exercised a
sense of spatial design. They were
sensitive to the difference between
images that inhabit one part of the
space and images that move through the
space, to foreground and background.
They were polite in their use of space,
deferring to each other or waiting for an
opening. I felt their politeness often
arose from an instinct to avoid cluttering
the space too much rather than a
play with space as an expressive element.
I also gathered from conversations
with a member of Group 6 that
there was an interest in integrating
Contact Improvisation with “image
work.” I’m not sure what is meant by
“image work,” but I saw performers
working with repeating movements,
holding particular movement states,
working with facial expression, attitude,
and posturing, mixed in with Contact
Improvisation material.
In Group 6, there were brief moments
of pure Contact Improvisation,
two bodies engaged in a responsive and
sensory physical dialogue. Jeff Bliss
and Nancy Stark Smith did a short
purely Contact Improvisation duet in
their first concert at the DIA Center for
the Arts. This duet was complex and
fast, and was clearly felt by the body
first and then perceived by the mind
This is distinct, in my mind, from using
contact vocabulary to create movement
images. For example, in one part of the
same performance at DIA, Chris Aiken
was spinning with someone up on his
shoulders and carried this person around
the space for quite a long time. I registered
this as a decision to sustain a
fixed image rather than a moment of
Contact Improvisation. Even though the
movement material was drawn from
Contact Improvisation and in this case
the dancers were in a moment of improvisation,
the motivation underlying the
choice to prolong spinning came from a
compositional idea outside the parameters
of the focus of a contact duet.
I wondered about a potential problem
in trying to integrate two or more
distinct ways of working. This approach
may set up a horizontal exploration,
leaving the work lingering on the
surface of various subjects rather than
delving into any one in particular.
While watching Group 6, I found I
was spending at least as much time
monitoring the performers’ struggle to
find material and negotiate the compositional
priorities of their physical images
as I was taking a ride on what they
were making. I felt a tremendous
amount of restraint within the perform-
ers, and I wasn’t sure why. In attempting
to honor a working process that
appeared to be not clearly understood,
they put themselves in a kind of confusion
which was almost cellular—physically,
their bodies were withholding.
As I watched, I imagined what I might
do to release myself, recalling alternate
ways of using my eyes or feeling space
with my body. My frustration rose with
the thought that their situation was, on
some level, hopeless. Without the glue
of a clear common working process no
one individual in a collaboration can
effectively change the overall composition.
New elements can be added but
the essential mix tends to remain the
same.
One definition of improvisation
(mentioned by Jennifer Monson during
the Studies Project at Judson Church
during the festival), is a focus on the
process of making choices. In performance,
it offers the opportunity to see
performers in the act of composing, of
responding to something. The question
is, responding to what? It is confusing
to give oneself the task of making a
choice, or formulating a response, when
there is no clear subject matter with
which to relate.
In my mind the action of composing
implies there is some underlying way of
working which becomes one’s subject,
one’s language, and informs a process
of manipulating elements relative to that
subject. Without a subject there is no
leverage. It is too late to begin clarifying
one’s subject while performing.
This left me with a lack of interest and
a low level of engagement watching
Group 6. Perhaps my personal interest
is in setting up a working situation in
which there is someplace to go, while
other people may be interested in a state
of being in which there is no place to
go but “now.”
Teri Carter & lone Beauchamp
directed a large group with the intention
of doing Contact Improvisation. They
performed on the final day of the festival.
They did not present the work as a
duet form, but neither did they attempt
to make a highly intentional ensemble
composition. They had an inherent trust
in the spatial composition created by
couples doing Contact Improvisation
spontaneously—beginning, ending, and
exchanging partners at various times.
This group had one quality that was
refreshing. I saw them extend their
vision and communicate with each other
through space in a very ordinary but
physical way. I saw one performer see
another performer across the space,
recognize a desire to come together, and
move to touch. That simple and palpable
progression was very easy to watch.
I realized this kind of simple sensory
communication was often unavailable to
the performers in Group 6.
There were artists in the festival
who used the occasion to perform
quickly constructed improvisational
scores, or improvisations with open
scores. The group pulled together by
Andrew Harwood, consisting of Andrew,
Steve Krieckhaus, Sondra Loring,
Kirstie Simson, and musicians, and
Alexis Eupierre’s solo performance at
Judson Church were performances of
this kind. The experience of watching
these performances was unpredictable,
and not dissimilar to watching jams
except for the energy added into the
mix by having an audience.
Alexis explained in the Studies
Project discussion after his performance,
that he had decided to enter the performance
space with no score, completely
empty, that he had never tried this
before, and that this was his interest at
the moment. During Alexis’s performance,
it was obvious that he was
struggling, and dealing with sensations
that were new and unfamiliar. Yet, he
did not have a lot of devices for covering
up his vulnerability, and so he
seemed really on an edge. I witnessed
him thread his way through his own
experience in a very open way. I perceived
the audience as very kind, open,
and observant I recognized that Alexis
had the clear desire to have an experience
in public.
I felt very different watching Andrew
Harwood’s group. It was clear
this group was working in a very open
or loosely scored way. I felt their motivation
to perform, like Alexis’s, came
from a desire to “have an experience in
public.” However, most of those performers
have a lot of experience performing
improvisational work, it is not
an edge for them to improvise in front
of an audience; they have a wealth of
extraordinary and virtuosic skills. I
expected more from their performance
work.
The ground created by the work of
this group was highly quixotic and I
had trouble relaxing and trusting the
performers. My experience varied
widely from being surprised by moments
of extraordinary dancing and
incongruous images to watching cheap
gimmicks and virtuosity in search of
audience approval. I found it painful
when one member of the ensemble
upstaged another or to witness a performer
exposing themselves in ways
they were unaware.
Steve Krieckhaus is someone I was
looking forward to watching. I’d seen
him improvise a few years ago and he
had a very developed dialogue with his
own movement. He was practically
invisible in the performances of
Andrew’s group. You could say, that
was his problem, he just didn’t come
out; but I’m not interested in watching
someone fight for visibility. None of
the other performers seemed to be able
to give him any space, and that disturbed
me. Andrew and Kirstie’s large
and incredible dancing dominated my
attention.
At one point I made a shift to track
Steve, and I saw a whole other performance.
Steve was out there trying to
figure out what to do, to look and see,
and feel the space. He was remarkably
quiet. At one point in their final performance
at the University Settlement
House, he did have a short solo. He
was getting into his work and drifted
over towards Andrew. It was perceived
by Andrew as an invitation, and perhaps
it was. Andrew walked out as if he was
an eraser and, moving across the floor
with a kind of insensitivity or bullishness,
wiped Steve off the space.
That is how I saw it. I was disappointed;
it is not pleasant for me to read
a performance event on this level. I
look forward to having my imagination
stimulated, my perceptions altered—to
learning something, not to seeing personal
dynamics and politics between
performers vying for space or using
everything they know to make theater
out of their vulnerability.
There was other work in the festival
where none of these considerations
mattered. There were artists whose
performance was based in a practice
that was quite defined, known, and
developed. These works were improvised
within a limited and knowable
field of parameters. I felt that, to name
a few, Zeena Parkins, who improvised
on an electronic harp, Kurtis Lamkin, a
poet who delivered his written poems
within an improvised conversation with
the audience, and Image Lab (K.J.
Holmes, Karen Nelson, Lisa Nelson,
and Scott Smith), who worked within a
specific and well-rehearsed ensemble
score, presented work of this nature.
They manipulated parameters on the fly,
with a sense of having explored the
territory. There was a sensitivity to the
compositional ramifications of their
choices. They had the instrument and
they knew how to play. As an audience,
I felt spoken to, directly addressed.
I found my imagination and
senses engaged as I tuned into the language
or world evoked by the performance
piece.
I couldn’t remember when I’d last
heard Zeena Parkins play. As I listened,
I was learning how she was listening. I
had the time to get in tune with her,
because she was busy with her process
of making music, and she stayed with it.
This is the kind of experience I look
forward to both in my own process of
making and showing work as well as
when I watch performance. I was altering
my perceptions and going somewhere.
The Improvisation Festival/NY establishes
a frame. Any work that is
included in it is contributing to an overview
that is, to some extent, defining or
revealing the current state of improvisation
in performance. Yet, though the
title Improvisation Festival indicates a
discerning sense, or curatorial choice to
highlight a particular genre or medium
of expression, I felt the artistic vision or
mission of the festival needed to be
clarified and made public.
Improvisation is a marginalized form
within the field of dance, an already
marginalized art form. My hope is that
an improvisation festival could provide
some leverage to further the visibility of
good improvisation and to consciously
educate the participants and public alike.
The field of improvisation contains
several sophisticated, developed and
profound movement forms and systems
of exploration. Yet for those who do
not know this, I fear the nature of a
festival of this kind is such that they
could come away without this knowledge.
I think it is important to find
ways of being supportive by being critical,
and my hope in writing this is to
stimulate more dialogue about the work
and the forms in which it can be presented.
I would like to thank Movement
Research and especially Julie Carr and
Sondra Loring for all their hard work in
creating and curating the Improvisation
Festival/NY. We do have a frame for
further dialogue. 

---------------------

A Curator's Point of View

by Julie Carr, Sondra Loring

by Julie Carr
with Sondra Loring
As curators of the Improvisation
Festival/NY, Sondra Loring and I would
like to respond to Danny Lepkoff’s
letter (in Movement Research Performance
Journal #10, and this issue of
CQ)t and to requests made by others to
explain our criteria for curation. We are
grateful for the questions and comments
we have received over the festival’s
three-year span, and are happy to take
this opportunity to discuss the goals,
hopes and values of the festival.
A Brief History
At the time of the festival’s conception
in 1991,1 was particularly interested
in how an artist’s environment affects
what they make and how they
work. I was specifically looking at how
an intensely urban environment might
affect dance-making and the relationship
of the dancer to the body. I was also
curious about the various sensibilities or
value systems which might emerge from
non-urban backdrops. I did not, and
still do not, assume that all work stemming
from a particular place necessarily
conforms to a particular set of stylistic
or contextual concerns, but I continue to
be interested in bringing this question to
light.
The idea for the first Improvisation
Festival/NY developed partially from
this inquiry. That year, a group of
eighteen improvisers were brought together
to work every day and to perform
three times at the end of a week. About
half were from New York and the others
from Canada, Western Massachusetts,
California, Minneapolis, Boston,
Seattle, etc. All shared some familiarity
with Contact Improvisation, probably
because this was my home territory and
so most of the people I knew had
worked with this material. There was,
however, no definite assumption that we
would be doing contact, or exclusively
contact, together. Sondra and I did not
know what would happen, but were very
interested in the experiment.
A lot was learned from this first
run. Mostly we heard requests that a
smaller group be formed and that people
be given opportunities to show then-
own more developed work as well. So,
as interest and energy were available,
and as Movement Research continued
their support of the project, Sondra and
I jumped at the bait and formed the
Second Annual Improvisation Festival/NY
which was exponentially larger
and more inclusive than the first The
festival then took on the form of a
showcase, highlighting many artists’
work and stretching to include visual
and video artists, poets, Action Theater
performers, and musicians as well as
dancers. The initial “contact group”
was reformed with some variation and
with less people. More workshops were
added. We wanted the festival to be
large and unwieldy, and imagined it to
have qualities of a circus or parade.
We hoped the fullness of the event
would carry with it an excitement and a
sense of cohesion and community. We
did want to curate “good” shows, to
provide space for local and non-local
artists to really do what they do, as well
as to leave room for some surprises.
There was no stated “theme” for the
festival other than that the work be
improvisational.
Some months after the second festival,
Sondra and I invited a diverse
group of improvisers together to discuss
possibilities for the future. We took
ideas and tried to model the third year
after some of the suggestions that arose.
Structurally, year three basically followed
in the footsteps of year two,
though we added more workshops
(five), and the roster of performers grew
to include more out-of-towners from
farther away and more artists from other
disciplines and backgrounds.
Festival Goals and Values
The festival aims to promote the
discussion, presentation and study of
improvisation as a performance form in
a wide range of disciplines.
We hope to bring people together in
a way that is minimally competitive but
that does allow artists to show their
interests, their current studies, their
expertise or their curiosities. It is not
of interest to either Sondra or I to curate
only work that is at its most developed
stages, or to curate only artists
who have already established their deep
connection to their material or partners.
It is of interest instead to show the
various stages of development which
can exist in improvisation and still
make for interesting and sometimes
very exciting performance.
When I was first witnessing performances
of improvisation, I was
thrilled simply by the exposure of the
performer’s mind in action. Often the
performers I watched were able to respond
to their internal and external
environments in ways that seemed quite
skillful, conscious, and controlled, and
this ability revealed their proficiency
and experience. But at the same time,
I often perceived the unconscious, intuitive
and impulsive responses at work,
and so felt that something was exposed
about the performer which perhaps was
not in their pocket, so to speak; not
what they meant to show, but what they
could not help showing.
In the dancing of the people I was
watching at that time (Steve Paxton,
Nancy Stark Smith, Karen Nelson, Alito
Alessi, K.J. Holmes, Andrew Harwood,
Steve Krieckhaus, Jennifer Monson, and
many many others) I saw the play between
their knowing selves and then-
more vulnerable under-selves. Both
skill and vulnerability were highlighted
by the unpredictable and often difficult
or confusing situations they placed
themselves in when performing.
So, in the formulation of the festival,
it has become a crucial consideration
that both of these aspects of improvisation
be exposed and respected.
It seemed important to bring to the
festival veteran improvisers, people for
whom this is their life’s work, who
already know their form and have a
deep sense of how to play their chosen
and well-rehearsed “instrument,” as
Danny puts it. However, it also seemed,
and still seems, valuable to show work
that is a result of tossing together elements,
assembling people who have not
worked together before, or who have,
but in very different contexts, or whose
working process is relatively new and
under investigation. I have found myself
hoping that the audiences of the
festival would relish both the exquisite
skill and control that some performances
reveal, and also delight in the perhaps
awkward but no less powerful emergence
that occurs when a situation is
less rehearsed, less formed.
The “searching” or “thinking on
stage” that is sometimes apparent, and
the “mistakes” which lend themselves to
a different kind of sense, are potent for
their ability to remind us who we are, to
remind us of our own essential transparency.
The truth that can sometimes
shine from even the most inexperienced
performer or the least “structured” dance
is, to me, one of the values of improvi-
sational performance.
It seems it may be useful to make
clear to an audience just what they are
seeing. If a group or an individual has
been working in a certain form or configuration
for a duration of time, it may
be important to know that. And if this
is a first time meeting, or an early-in-
development performance, this might
also be important to state. This is a
question I am not resolved about. Certainly
the festival offers room for questions
and discussions amongst performers
and audience, but it’s possible that
framing performances in an informative
way might make viewing an “easier”
and less confusing experience.
Curation
Our basis of curation falls roughly
into four categories: 1) artists (both
veterans and emerging) who have a
commitment to performing improvisation,
2) artists who excite us by their
work, 3) out-of-town artists, and 4)
diversity in terms of race, gender, and
artistic discipline.
We are not attempting to bring to
the festival “every” improvisation concept
which is in the works today, this
being an obviously impossible mission
and one which would demand extensive
research as well as a quite dramatic
presumption. But neither are we interested
in narrowing the festival to
themes. The ranginess and unwieldiness
of the festival is in fact one of our
goals. There is, however, some focus
on “quality,” and this is of course
where the job of curator gets somewhat
ugly and messy.
Taking on leadership of something
new and of (relatively speaking) large
scope, does seem to give us, as the
initiators, some freedom (or freedom’s
partner, responsibility) to make decisions
based on our own judgment. We
could, and this has been suggested,
release the curatorial role altogether and
allow the event to shape itself on a
first-come-first-served basis or some
other non-judgmental decision process.
The Field operates in this way, as have
other performance events I have been
part of. This has not been our choice,
largely because of our desire to create
something that reflects our concerns and
interests as dancers and dance-makers.
Also, we believe that if improvisa-
tional dance and performance is to be
taken seriously as an art form, it is
useful to invent forums for the work
which attempt to draw attention from
outside the community. There is ample
need for events which act mostly as
community supports, and I am extremely
grateful for the jams and workshops
which nurture the improvisation community.
The festival, on the other hand,
while wishing to support improvisation,
and to further a sense of community
amongst artists, also hopes to reach
beyond the community in order to draw
new excitement to the work.
We do not curate so tightly that
there is no room for recommendations,
or for people to call us with a particular
idea. Our curatorial approach has been
varied. Some people we have invited to
bring specific work, others we have
simply invited to do something—anything—and
in other instances, people
approached us with a desire to perform
and we made space for them. That, in
a few paragraphs, is pretty much the
messy job of it.
For next year’s festival, we’re
making a public invitation for proposals
in order to widen the scope of our curation.
See details below.
I would like to thank Movement
Research for their continued support of
this project and all the participants
including students, audience members,
volunteers, teachers and performers, for
making the festival. We hope in future
years to grow in ways that will both
surprise and delight us.


---------------------


In Quest of a New World: founding a new school 
by Anne Kilcoyn

I have recently moved to America
from England. My official papers
tell me I am a resident alien. I am not
alienated by this though, I am excited
by the possibilities that being in a
strange place and moving within a new
tribe open up for me. (Was it George
Bernard Shaw who said that the Americans
and the English are divided by a
common language?)
I remember the other big move I
made in 1961 when I left the genteel
Home Counties of England for the Anatolian
steppes of Turkey in Asia. I was
never quite the same again. That move
was not only geographical but also
cultural and intellectual. The move led
to a series of shifting perceptions and
fundamentally changed understandings—a
realisation that my own culture
had taught me its own definition of the
world as if it was writ in stone, when in
fact it was only a relative view. I began
to see that even the most subtle and
flexible of my native institutions (my
mother tongue and my body language),
placed very particular and fundamental
parameters and limitations on my understanding
of everything and my communication
with everyone. English ways
of perceiving and communicating were
now simply part of a series of possibilities.
My sojourn in Turkey meant that
the realm of the “possible” was forever
enlarged. What will America hold in
store? It already looks promising.
Over the years as I moved my
thoughts and practice around (eventually
back to England), my professional base
shifted from theatre and visual art, to
education, to psychology, to psychoanalysis,
to body-based therapies, back to
theatre and now dance, to contact improvisation.
Why change fields so often? Since
an early teaching experience with an
eleven-year-old girl who improvised
around the story of Macbeth and revealed
to herself and the rest of us a
private world of family abuse, I have
been in search of a Holy Grail. A
system of thought and practice which is
not trapped in a mind/body split and
which recognises the healing potential
of the performance metaphor on an
individual and communal level.
As I am the person that made this
particular interprofessional journey I
have some understanding of the links
between one field of practice and another.
In England, professionally articulating
the links and connections between
each field, and/or integrating one field
within another has always proved difficult.
Each field proves to have its own
language, its own professional identity,
its own self-imposed legitimate and
privileged area of enquiry, a keen sense
of its own “professionalism.” The
privileged area of enquiry in each discipline
seems to manifest as an implicit/
unconscious and explicit/public
code—an almost tribal list of do’s and
don’ts, yielding to its aficionados, its
own flashes of insight, and its own
blind spots.
Psychoanalysis, for example, places
primary importance on Mind. The
Body tends to be seen as an instinctual
boiler-room finding release through a
series of developmentally linked orifices—oral,
anal, genital. In consulting
room practice, psychoanalysis holds the
body recumbent and still whilst the
intricacies of the labyrinthine mind and
personal developmental history are
tracked in detail. Beware those who
dare to seriously challenge the supremacy
of Mind over Body from within the
psychoanalytic tribe. Such a challenge
is radical, a deconstruction of a previously
unquestioned assumption. No
tribe can tolerate a consistent radical
challenge to its conceptual underpinning,
its tribal philosophy and customs.
The price is scapegoating at best, expulsion
from the tribe at worst. Wilhelm
Reich researched and published on the
Mind-Body as one system—he was
rewarded for his efforts by formal expulsion
from the Psychoanalytic Association
and a public burning of his books
by the federal authorities in the United
States!! (This century, folks! Really!)
My own attempts to have my group
therapy clients sitting on the floor rather
than on chairs so that the body is free
to move and be fully involved was
regarded within the Tavistock Clinic in
London in 1976 as peculiar, even dangerous.
Permission to proceed was
reluctantly granted after bruising battles
in committee rooms, with the proviso
that my group would be observed continuously
from behind a one way mirror
by a senior member of staff, and my
graduation from the psychotherapy
training course might now be in
question.
Suspicion abounds on both sides of
the professional spectrum. Even now,
twenty-five years later, I am still
amazed that many English performers
and arts academics are deeply reluctant
to articulate the connection between
performance making/training and a
healing process. Indeed many performing
artists (in England) tend to eschew
the therapies (despite the emergence of
the drama and dance therapies); seeing
the psychotherapies in particular as
potentially creativity-sucking, draining
the artist of the unnamable force which
fuels the artistic drive.
When I finally made contact with
contacters (most of whom come from
the American tribe), I began to meet
people who live in both worlds...weaving
their way through life as both performers
and bodyworkers, working daily
with the unity of the body-mind system
and with a consciousness of healing
forces. There was still a gap however;
each of the people I talked to have
trained as dancer/performer separately
from training as a bodyworker. The
essential synthesis between one field
and another had been left to them to
discover or not. The Holy Grail was
still elusive.
Arriving in the Bay Area this autumn,
not consciously thinking of the
Holy Grail, I rang Carol Swann to get
directions to the Berkeley Contact Jam.
She was glad to hear from me; she is
putting together a new school and invited
me to come to a board meeting.
“The School has the body as its
focus and a field of study that moves
through education, health, movement
research and performance,” said Carol,
and my ears immediately pricked up.
Under one roof, speaking one language,
interconnecting, cross-fertilising? Is it
possible? After all these years?
I was tremendously heartened by the
board meeting—a cross section of artists,
bodyworkers, teachers, community
leaders and business advisors—the
group had its right and left hemispheres
both in gear simultaneously. The room
sparkled with vision, efficiency, humour,
good communication, experience, committment
and a sense of genuine preparedness
for an educational adventure.
Some of the words used give an idea of
the underlying vision of SPAR—School
for Participatory Arts and Research—
“creative and sustaining careers in the
arts, health and education,” “contemporary
experiments and traditional forms
in the performing arts and somatic research,”
“guided by our students’ interests,”
“hands-on education,” “activating
creativity and health in the individual
and the community,” “cultivating the
wisdom of the body towards mutual
growth and social change.”
But more consoling than all the
mind/body/healing/art words (many are
the unfulfilled educational promises I
have heard spoken over the years), more
impressive than the detailed business
plan and the galvanising inspiration of
the Mission Statement, was the physical

behaviour of the board: without shedding
one iota of their intelligent approach
to the task in hand, my fellow
board members stretched, breathed and
moved around whenever they felt like it.
Discussion did not falter; attention did
not flag. Actions speak louder than
words. If a board of directors has the
institutional freedom to be thinking,
moving bodies at one and the same
time, the fruit of the school will undoubtedly
be a feast of synthesis, integration
and new connections.
Carol is the Executive Director and
is to be applauded for her vision and
unruffled sense of good humoured purpose.
Her experience with contact,
voice, bodywork and Hakomi therapy
ideally prepares her to facilitate those
who work with her in making new links
between mind and body, healing and
performance. She also has a remarkable
history of successful innovation
(Administrative Director of Movement
Research, co-founder of A Cappella
Motion, Island Movement, New Forms
and the Outfall Dance Intensive.) She
has gathered together a multi-talented
founding group of directors. Martha
Eddy (the founder of Somatic Movement
Therapy, a blend of Body-Mind
Centering1”1 and Laban Movement Analysis)
will develop the somatics aspect of
the curriculum. Dancer/choreographer
Jon Weaver will develop the performance
aspect of the School’s work.
Mark Griffith is the administrative
director. Mark is an artist and dancer
who has specialised in arts administration.
He brings to the school a very
clear sense of forward-looking creative
planning, of articulating philosophy and
of developing goals and budget sheets
which reflect the vision and values of
the founding group.
Core faculty includes Sara Shelton
Mann (First Moves), Kirstie Simson
(Gutsy dancing, Contact Improv), Jon
Weaver (Contemporary technique), Lisa
Schmidt (Contemporary technique
taught through the lens of Body-Mind
Centering1"1 and Authentic Movement),
Carol Swann (Vocal Motion), Lauren
Elder (Site Specific Interdisciplinary
Work), Martha Eddy (Somatic Movement
Therapy, Movement Analysis and
Observation, Hands-on Repatteming).
Visiting teachers will offer courses in
choreography, improvisation, Felden-
krais method, voice, Hakomi, Aikido,
and more.
With contact improvisation as a core
discipline, the usual roles of student/
teacher, therapist/client are expected to
gradually shift towards a more creative
interchange.
Members of the school, whether
their research is weighted in favour of
somatic studies or performance studies
will have the opportunity to work with
and for the wider community during the
second term—therefore study will range
from the micro-cellular to working in
community contexts.
The school aims to offer a certification
program for teachers, performing
artists and movement therapists who
want to bridge the fields of education,
health and the arts. The vision is that
graduates will be able to register as
movement therapists and at the same
time develop into community leaders
and social change artists who integrate
their ideas and practice into the world.
Outreach programs to expand participation
in the arts for underserved and
special populations and to support community
expressions of culture are part
of the program.
The course lasts a year (full time)
but can (oh joy, oh joy) be undertaken
in modular form for those who can’t
afford the time (September to May), or
the money, to pursue it on a full time
basis. Despite my thirty-year preoccupation
with split mind/body and
health/arts systems, I am so aware of
gaps in my understanding. This program
could enable me to investigate
them.
I am excited by this. The last time
I had this feeling of wanting to be a
student on a course that I was involved
in developing was in the Theatre Department
of Dartington College of Arts,
which I joined after my period with
psychoanalysis. There, the visionary
educator Colette King brought together
a faculty which included actors, writers,
directors, dancers, choreographers, psychologists,
sociologists and community
animateurs. It was there that I met
Mary Fulkerson, Steve Paxton, Lisa
Nelson, Simone Forti and many others
and saw for the first time dances that
were kinetically (and therefore internally)
driven—a revelation and source of
mind/body fascination for me for the
years that followed. It was one of the
most fruitful turning points of my life.
The Touchdown Dance project which I
later set up with Steve in England continues
to provide a movement research
forum and performance training for
mixed groups of blind and sighted people.
That experience was like travelling
to a foreign country. Scales fell from
my eyes, weight dropped from my
rediscovered body, space opened up in
my imagination, new dynamics emerged
in my communication with myself and
others.
SPAR seems to be another turning
point; another benefit of leaving the Old
World of preconceptions and arriving in
the New World of changing perceptions.
I am glad to be a resident alien, or—to
borrow the language of the tribe in this
land—I am glad to join this project with
pioneers on a new (or is it a very old)
frontier. 


---------------------


Cuba April 1994 
by Paul Langland

In April 1994, the second Taller
Internacional de Danza Experimental
was held in Havana, Cuba. The
festival was organized by David Zambrano,
Venezuelan dancer from New
York, and Rosario Cardenas, director
of the Cuban dance company Danza
Combinatorio. Along with Alexis
Eupierre from Barcelona and Becky
Hilton from NY, I was invited to teach
and perform for two weeks at the
Teatro Nacional.
What follows is an abridged version
of my journal. Each day was
filled with confrontations, magic, and
surprises which are hard to convey.
In concern for the political safety of
many of the new friends / made there,
I’ve omitted details of experiences and
conversations that I feel might endanger
them. But I would like to say that
the artistic community I came in contact
with is complex and cosmopolitan
and the issues are not always black
and white. Each day was an eye
opener. Being in a country so cut off
from the U.S., and thus so different
from my world, made each day feel as
if reality was being reconstructed.
4/3/94 Big changes in plans to go to
Cuba. With visa and schedule problems,
we all missed our original departure
dates. David thinks that there is a
70% chance of the tour happening. If
visas arrive today, we can leave for
Miami on Tuesday, and go to Havana
on Wednesday. Three days late, but
better late than never.
Paul in Old Havana.
4/6/94 Flood of activity at Miami
Airport. Flight to Havana postponed—no,
now it’s on time. During
final boarding, Becky Hilton is informed
that she is not allowed to go,
no one is sure why, but that I can.
For some reason there’s not enough
proof that there’s a visa waiting for
her in Cuba. We make two desperate
calls to New York. “Bye honey, you
are brave,” says Colin’s sleepy voice.
“Well, go for the experience,” urges
David. Later, alone, I arrive at Jose
Marti Airport. The airport is having
multiple power blackouts, alarms
ringing each time.
In the evening, there are constant
discussions with my new hosts, vaguely
understood, about what happened to
Becky, and what is happening with
Alexis. It is extremely difficult to call
or fax Cuba, so little was known about
arrangements from our end.
What a beautiful, yet crumbling
city. No one speaks English. I am
soon engaged in intense negotiations
over the hotel room price. Finally it
is lowered by half—thank god because
I have limited cash, and absolutely no
way of getting more before returning.
4/7/94 The class went very well. The
students are at many different levels.
Many are beautiful movers. They
have tremendous passion and clarity in
their bodies, while easily integrating
released warmups, and improvisational
composition information. There are
35 people in class from many different
modem dance companies and schools.
Rosario Cardenas, the festival producer
in Havana, is introducing me to
many people in the dance world
here—choreographers, musicians,
dancers, scene designers. Along with
all of the other difficulties of life in
Cuba, she is constantly teaching off
roles to new company members. Each
time she takes her company out of
Cuba on tour, several defect Sadly,
she says that she can’t blame them.
Her salary equals $4 per month. Her
dancers earn $1.78 per month.
4/8/94 Rosario’s birthday party.
Great! Rosario’s composer was there
who is the son of Virgilio Pinera. I
have just read about Virgilio in Rein-
aldo Arenas’s rich and tortuous Cuban
biography Before Night Falls. Also
there was Jean McLean, an Australian
member of parliament on a diplomatic
trip to Cuba to explore ways to increase
tourism to Cuba.
Company members of Rosario’s
gave me salsa lessons—so sensual yet
dignified. I improved with rum and
the raucous encouragement of all
there. Then on to Afro-Cuban dance.
I didn’t know my hips were so bad. I
guess I shouldn’t be surprised considering
my Northern European genetic
impediment. I brought a bag of chocolates
(from the States) to the party.
They created a sensation. There is
litte food or anything else to be found;
no meat, fruit, vegetables, candy,
paint, hardware, plastic, or clothing.
Outside Rosario’s house, the street
was pitch black. Most houses are also
without electricity. As the power
plants break down, electricity is turned
off for 8 to 10 hours a day. It is 1994
in the center of a city of 2 million.
There is no light. Candles are an
expensive luxury.
4/9/94 Classes are going well. The
students are smart and passionate.
Rosa Elena, Rosario’s manager, took
me to the tourist food store. I bought
her family a big can of powdered milk
which they can’t afford. Her father is
a doctor and her mother is a lawyer.
She was trembling at the sight of such
luxuries as cooking oil and bread. I
was fighting tears. Later I attempt to
go to a performance of Isabel Bustos’s
company. We all sit in the dark courtyard
of a Spanish colonial mansion,
now a theater, hoping that power will
come on to run the show. After two
hours we all leave, no power, no
show.
Alexis arrived, a minor miracle.
His flight from Spain had a sudden
unannounced schedule change. I realize
now that Becky is not going to
make it. We cannot call or fax the
States to get any information. Like
Becky, Alexis’s visa was invalid, but
he was able to buy a tourist visa on
the spot for $30 at Madrid airport.
From the U.S.A. this is impossible.
Because of the embargo against Cuba,
any financial transaction with Cuba,
including the purchase of a tourist
visa, is strictly forbidden.
4/11/94 More performances—these
performed during the daylight so they
weren’t cancelled. The work of Mari-
anela Bonn’s company, Danza Abierta,
is beautiful, with passion and content
in the form of magic realism, yet
confluent with the released and impro-
visational quality of work from downtown
NY. Also a trip to a great
beach, and being a guest at a honest-
to-goodness Havana gay party. Being
gay myself, this was one of many
enlightening experiences—so similar to
the U.S. in style and values, yet so
different in terms of political acceptance.
It’s amazing to see how far
underground gay life can be driven
and still survive and even thrive.
Back at the hotel, I met a doctor
who will look for aspirin at the hospital
for my knee which has been acting
up.
4/12/94 The doctor, Omar, returned
to the hotel with word that there is no
aspirin at the hospital. He offered a
Santoria healing for me, since his
stepsister is a priestess. I accept.
Later, Alexis and I are guests of
Alberto Mendes, the choreographer of
the National Ballet of Cuba, for a
rehearsal of the company in their
beautiful, crumbling Spanish colonial
studios.
4/13/94 Classes are very deep and
satisfying. Alex and I work well
together. There is no water at the
studio. The elevator to the eighth
floor, where we teach, broke several
years ago, and there are no parts to fix
it. There is no soap to wash the floor.
Students bicycle up to eight miles to
get to class. They, along with their
directors, have little to eat or drink.
After rich, energetic classes, we
are all covered with dust and dirt, and
are dehydrated by the 95 degree humid
heat. All of this at the large
modem Teatro Nacional, the Lincoln
Center of Cuba. It’s quickly turning
into a technological ruin as the country
grinds to a halt.
In the early evening, I have my
Santoria healing. Sitting on a chair
over a chalk circle full of symbols, the
air is purified by burning pools of
kerosene splashed on the tile floor.
Omar’s sister goes into her trance;
smoking a cigar, barking, moaning,
and writhing, she is lovingly and
carefully guided by her sister as they
gradually approach me from the altar.
4/14/94 Alberto Mendes takes Alexis
and me to the Morrow, the huge ancient
fortress used until recently as a
prison for political prisoners, criminals
and gays. I have just read the chapter
in Arenas’s book about his imprisonment
there in the 1970s for being an
artist and a homosexual. Next we
went to the Cuban Arts Club in a
stylish old mansion of which there are
thousands in Havana.
At our last class, we handed out
packages of toothpaste and shampoo
which we had brought with us for the
students. I perform my solo. My
dancing is intense. I think I’ve been
affected by their struggle, salsa, Santoria,
and their passion for dance. I
show videotapes brought from New
York. I feel sad to leave these new
friends and talented dancers. Alexis is
scheduled to perform on the weekend,
since his flight leaves two days later.
Afterwards, at Rosario’s house,
she shows us videos of her work.
There is an exciting, fertile, developed
dance scene here, partly because dance
is such a part of the culture, and also
perhaps because they must fight for
their dancing.
4/15/94 At the airport, I’m filled with
emotion about my time spent here. I
have never been so affected by a place
and its people so quickly and deeply.
I’ll never forget this intense, exotic,
and artistically rich two weeks. A
friend in Havana asked me if I was
there to study or teach. I really started
to feel that I was there to do both.
Heartfelt thanks to David Zambrano,
Rosario Cardenas and her company,
the Taller Intemacional de
Danza Experimental, the Suitcase
Fund of Dance Theater Workshop, and
the Department of Undergraduate
Drama at New York University for
helping to make this amazing cultural
exchange possible. ★

---------------------


RUNNING AND STANDING STILL

by Diane Madden, Kevin Kortan

two views of performing Trisha Brown's For M.G.: The Movie
Last Summer while planning a lecture-demonstration for the Colorado Dance Festival,
Trisha invited me to speak about my experience of the running solo in For M.G.: The Movie. I
chose to write something rather than speak impromptu. In preparation for this article in CQ,
Kevin Kortan, another dancer in the piece, was inspired to write about his singular role of
standing for the duration of the dance. Kevin and I have often congratulated, joked and
commiserated on the internal similarities of our roles.
About the dance: In 1991 Trisha Brown made a thirty-three minute dance, For M.G.: The
Movie, with music by Alvin Curran and lighting design by Spencer Brown. There are four main
components to the dance: a man standing stage left facing upstage for the duration of the piece, a
woman running, a highly technical unison duet between a man and a woman based on the idea
of a cube rotating through the space, and an eccentric gestural solo for a woman. Even though
there are moments when these components occupy the space at the same time, they are performed
independent of each other. There is also a trio of two men and a woman that laces through the
duet. It is a partnering trio re-organizing the duet phrase, in which one of the men is out of sync,
acting as a voyeur. Slow motion is one of the devices used in the dance to create an elastic, filmic
approach to time. [D.M.]

The running solo feels like I’m a marble released in a bowl
following its course without interruption.
There are stops, but they are like the peak of a swing
when no movement is visible as the transition
is made through the balance of up and down.
The time and shape of the dance is determined by
the proportions of the space I’m filling
and the balancing of forward and backward movement
with gravity, momentum and centrifugal force.
Its simplicity strips bare the essential relationship between
dancer and form.
The dance becomes the moment to moment assessment
of that relationship.
In its idealized version the assessment is accurate,
forces are aligned and I’m dancing at the
edge of my capabilities.
The actual dance is in the miscalculations...
overshoot the edge and I may hit the deck,
undershoot and I use my muscles too much.
One of the inspirations for this dance came from
running down mini-mountains in Montana in one pass
one fell swoop
one non-stop action beginning at the top and
ending at the bottom.
It was like skiing without skis
using the momentum of the fall to connect the action
from start to finish, making it one huge gesture.
By bringing this blown-up time and space approach
to the running solo, I see the dance as a song.
The repetitions of the forms are the vibrations
which make up the elongated tones of a song.
The dance was made in a 40’ by 28’ space.
I wear that space. It’s a tight fit.
If I lose a couple feet in either direction
it changes the sound of the dance
smaller forms
more repetitions
faster vibrations
higher tone.
Making this dance, through Trisha’s direction, we mined
a form that is essential to who I am.
Because of its fierce simplicity it is one of the
most challenging dances I’ve ever performed.

- Diane Madden

Making the running solo, Trisha and I often relied on drawing to communicate our ideas.
We were both surprised by my sure hand and Trisha encouraged me to draw more with a
gift of 30” x 20” drawing paper and black crayons. The drawings became another creative
process for me with their own logic. What worked three-dimensionally did not always
work on paper. One exception was the figure-eight form which is the first of the ten forms
in the dance. In the drawings, any more than two, or sometimes three, forms would
clutter the page, and I made up forms which don’t appear in the dance. Each drawing
had its own particular rhythmic song as it was being made. They are similar to the dance
in their ongoingness.
The drawing is finished when my hand stops moving.


A CALL TO DANCE
Stand.
Okay, standing.
Always beginning, always ending
Moving
Stilling
My task: to stand — still — in place — feet under hips — arms at my sides.
For how long? At the inception of this dance, who knew? It was the first full
piece that I had made with Trisha. All I knew was — I wanted to DANCE!
Meanwhile as we made the dance, I stood and waited and stood and wondered
and stood and angered and stood and laughed and stood and cried and stood
and stiffened and stood and relaxed and stood and breathed and stood and
directed my body and stood and listened to my body, my heart, my spirit and
stood and waited and stood. Ultimately the question arose, “Why should I begin
to move when the dance seems to be forming in relation to my stillness?”
Stillness is to movement what silence is to sound: the point of departure and
the point to which all returns.

It was becoming more and more apparent that I had found my place in this
dance, whether I liked it or not.
I am past
I am present
I am future
I am someone
I am no one
I am everyone
I am
Everyman
should have the opportunity to stand and have his silent stillness be witnessed
by eyes in the dark behind him.
How is it that this standing is at times a refuge, a safe haven, even blissful,
while at other times it is claustrophic, a trap, torturous? I began to realize that
this forced meditation could be mine if I accepted it — all 33 minutes of it.
Accept it and all that runs through me: the waves of energy and thought
dispersing, collecting
draining me, filling me
Does the back of my body reveal my history? Can my experience of the moment
be felt as I face away?
I am a Mountain formed through time, not the same as before — changed,
changing. Change marks itself slowly, with clear paint, barely noticeable on the
surface, but still there; until an avalanche comes and all tumbles. Twice, just
1 minute short of the 33, I fainted.
Dying Living
I listen to all in and around myself through the breath,
my breath moving, stilling
Still moving
Moving stillness
Still
Standing...

- Kevin Kortan

---------------------

THE ART OF MOVEMENT 1993
by Lisa First


International Festival of Movement & Dance on the Volga
by Lisa First
Late summer felt like winter
when the American and European
dancers arrived at the Druzhba, a
former Soviet Communist Party hotel
in Yaroslavl, Russia. They entered the
stark and chilly lobby after midnight in
a time zone halfway around the world.
A translator loudly attempted to direct
the exhausted travelers. At the desk,
disinterested local hotel employees
were handing out room keys only in
answer to requests made in Russian. I
suddenly realized that I knew everyone
well by their credentials but found
myself surprisingly hard pressed to put
names to unfamiliar faces...
This was the scene of the arrival of
the twenty-five-member Western
contingent of participants for the First
International Festival on the Volga, The
Art of Movement 1993. They had met
in Moscow Airport for the five-hour
bus ride north to Yaroslavl. Participants'
points of origin included Canada,
the United States, Puerto Rico, and
various cities in northern Europe. Some
had traveled as many as thirty-six
hours to reach Moscow.
The festival took place from August
27 to September 6, 1993. Its purpose
was to bring together a wide range of
Russian and Western movement and
dance artists and professionals. As
festival organizer and Western director,
it was my hope that such a festival
could encourage artistic and personal
understanding through collaboration
and shared experience in the fields of
dance and movement.
together a representative group of
Western and Russian dancers to exchange
information and ideas. This
exchange aspect of the festival was
very important to me. Also, my intention
in organizing the Western contingent
was both to bring skilled Western
artists to Russia and to assemble a
group that could represent the diversity
of dance and movement interests in
the West.
Background
The Russian participants included
dancers, movement artists, theatrical
directors, and dance and theatre students,
many of whom came from Moscow,
as well as from former Soviet
republics far from Russia.
The North American and European
contingent consisted of movement
educators and performers, modem
dancers and choreographers, including
Duncan performers. Classes and workshops
included choreography, technique,
improvisation, movement
awareness techniques, dance for the
video camera and a dance/ video work
presentation.
My primary desire was to bring
Organization and
Implementation
In Russia, everyone wanted to
know why I chose Yaroslavl for the
location of the festival. An ancient
Russian city, Yaroslavl dates back to
1010. It was once the capital of Russia,
although only for about a year, and is
located on the Volga River. Well-
known for its beautiful architecture
and design, it is among the historic
circle of Russian cities surrounding
Moscow known as the "Golden Ring."
Yaroslavl was a safer environment than
Moscow due to the current unstable
post-Soviet economic and political
situation. Statistically, Moscow is now
ranked among the most dangerous
cities in the world, primarily due to the
marked increase of organized crime.
It was possible to organize and implement
a festival in Russia once I had,
over a five-year period, established a
base of experience and contacts within
the country. I had spent several previous
summers in Yaroslavl and had
many friends and contacts whom I
knew I could rely upon for help and
support The support and interest of
many people in the West also served to
buoy my efforts. The strong and inspiring
response to an article that I
wrote for Contact Quarterly, "A
Glimpse of a Movement: Improvising
in Russia" (Spring/Summer '91, VoL
16, no. 2), was my initial incentive.
People wrote and telephoned me from
all over the world to express their
interest in going to Russia. I was surprised
and touched by these responses,
and it meant a lot to me that several
people who wrote to me after my original
article attended the festival in Russia
several years later.
A trip to Yaroslavl in January of
1993 while in Russia for an International
Isadora Duncan Retrospective led to
the break I had been seeking for several
years. Concern "IKAR", a Russian
business organization formed since
Glasnost, saw in the festival an opportunity
for publicity and profit from
Westerners, as well as to enhance the
artistic reputation of the city of Yaroslavl.
A steering committee was
formed consisting of Russian director
Olga Sedmova (vice-president of Concern
"IKAR"); myself, as international
director; and representatives of the
Union of Theatrical Workers and
Theatrical Institute of YaroslavL
The Great Net was the theater
group with whom the idea for the
festival had first been created. However,
for purposes of good communication,
I found that I had to work with a
well-established organization, such as
Concern "IKAR."
In March of 1993,1 founded a small
organization called Link Vostok (a
blend of English and Russian that
means 'link with the East") to facilitate
the festival and future East/West
dance and movement exchanges. I had
some assistance with grant writing
from the Massachusetts-based Network
for International Exchange, but was not
able to attract funds. This meant that I
could not hire people to assist in the
organization of the festival. Instead, I
served as the sole Western organizer,
often bartering Alexander Technique
lessons for help in preparing massive
mailings.
Once the framework for the festival
was in place, my real work began. It
was early February and the festival was
scheduled to begin in August. All of
the specifics of participant registration
and commitments of space, housing,
and translators had to be completed
with immediacy. I prepared a brochure
and did an eight-hundred-piece
mailing calling for proposals for lectures,
classes, workshops and performances.
Fortunately, Concern "IKAR" had a
fax machine, not common in Russia at
the time; without communication by
fax, none of the initial arrangements
could have been made. Phone connection
was exorbitantly expensive and of
poor quality. Correspondence by mail
was impossibly slow and unreliable.
The everchanging economic and political
conditions in Russia added an element
of challenge and uncertainty.
Another important aspect of festival
implementation was the planning of
nightly concerts by Eastern and Western
artists. The process of organizing,
scheduling, and contracting performers
was complicated by language, cultural,
and geographic differences.
The First Day
The opening day of the festival was
a Sunday. No classes were planned for
this day in order to give travelers an
opportunity to adjust to the new time
zone and to recover from their journeys.
A trip to the historic Tolga Nunnery
took place Sunday morning. The
nuns at Tolga live exactly like nuns did
in the Middle Ages. Pre-Glasnost, the
nunnery was a hidden Soviet prison on
the Volga. No one in Yaroslavl even
knew of the prison's existence. Prior to
the prison, there was a monastery at
that location. The trip to the nunnery
was followed by an afternoon tour of
some of the theatres and spaces we
would use, followed by a meeting for
the foreign participants with myself
and Olga, the Russian director.
Sunday evening there was a performance
in the Theatre for Young Spectators,
an ornate 1,500-seat modem theatre
built during the Soviet era. Many
dance groups from the Yaroslavl region
performed that evening, primarily
the more traditional Russian dance
forms—folk dance and ballet There
was a large number of dancers of all
ages, many were very young and all
were highly skilled.
Patricia Adams, artistic co-director
of the American dance company, Dances
by Isadora, who performed at the
International Isadora Duncan Retrospective
in January 1993 in Moscow,
aptly commented that "in Russia,
many more children are involved in
the study of music and dance than in
the U.S." Isadora Duncan had lived in
Moscow right after the Russian revolution
and was married to the poet Sergei
Esenin. Russians remain very interested
in her, and I have met Russian
women who danced with her as children.
The first day ended with a two-
hour boat ride on the Volga River for
all participants. This allowed Eastern
and Western artists to meet socially for
the first time. The air was cool. Even
though it was still August, many trees
had already turned color. There was a
beautiful lingering sunset, and birch
trees lined the riverbank, interspersed
with old, often abandoned, onion-
domed fifteenth and sixteenth-century
churches. Yaroslavl used to have more
than a hundred such churches. About
twenty remain today, the rest were
destroyed during fighting between the
Red and White Armies and by Stalin's
attempts at modernization and the
destruction of religion.

Challenges

One of the difficulties of international
coordination was to meet the
expectations and demands of the Russian
organizers, who maintained very
inflexible deadlines about applications,
deposits, and housing.
I went to Russia five weeks before
the festival to complete a variety of
preliminaries such as biographies,
schedules, and publicity. One important
detail, finding an adequate floor
for barefoot dancers, was never fully
accomplished. Russian dancers almost
always wear shoes. No one understood
what "marley" was. We finally
had to settle for a cloth covering on an
uneven wooden floor at our primary
theatre. Detailed bilingual schedules
were needed by all participants, translators,
and staff. Except for Concern
"IKAR", most of the Russian organizers
were volunteers with varying degrees
of reliability.
I immediately ordered bottles of
expensive and hard-to-find mineral
water for participants because the tap
water isn't safe to drink. Russians
don't drink water the way that Americans
do. I had to convince organizers
of its importance. When the water
arrived, it turned out to be heavily
salted and there was no time to reorder.
Food was an issue as well. In
previous years, I had encountered
severe food shortages. There was
much more food available during the
summer of 1993 (although prices were
very high in rubles). Even so, the
restaurant at the hotel Druzhba provided
very poorly turned out meals.
There were many complaints about the
food. For example, a meal for vegetarians
was sometimes just rice! Eventually
we paid our bus driver to go to the
market and buy fresh fruit and vegetables
for the participants.
In the summer in Yaroslavl, major
repair work is done on the water systems.
This always requires certain
areas of the city to be without hot
water for weeks at a time. Unfortunately,
the hotel was without hot water
for the entire duration of the festival,
and the weather was unpredictably
cold. Most participants had not
brought warm enough clothing. This
remained an unresolvable problem.
On the third day of the festival,
Olga, my Russian counterpart, left for
Belgium with one of my primary organizers
and translators, not to return
before the end of the festival. That
was a frustrating blow.
Also, originally the festival was to
take place at the famed Volkov Theatre,
the first Russian public theatre.
However, when I told the director of
the Volkov that I could not accommodate
their request to organize a corresponding
festival in Boston, Massachusetts,
for a date just one month after
the Russian festival, they pulled out I
did not discover this until my arrival
in Yaroslavl.
The Russian organizers had to find
participants for the festival, as well as
audiences for nightly concerts. Information
appeared widely in print media,
and a Russian-language interview
with me was broadcast on the radio,
locally and nationally. The publicity
was very effective. Russians could
take classes or attend workshops without
charge.
Classes and Workshops
I liked the idea of getting people
from different backgrounds together in
an intensive setting where they must
work together, collaborate, or disagree,
with movement as their common denominator.
We had ten translators
assigned to the festival and a large
proportion of them were, though very
well-intentioned, completely unable to
translate the difficult subject matter.
This was a source of great frustration
for lecturers and meant that the more
experienced translators had to work
overtime for very little pay.
Classes and workshops took place
at the Theatrical Institute of Yaroslavl
and at the Theatre for Young Spectators.
These buildings were not more
than ten city blocks from the Druzhba
Hotel, but for participants unable to
read signs or ask directions in Russian,
getting to class was a complex process!
The buildings were spacious and adequate
except for the lack of heat and
the floors that did not accommodate
barefoot dancers (nor, as U.S. artist
Margot Mink Colbert said, "the future
of modem dance floorwork in Russia").
When a much needed tape player
was unavailable for one of the classes,
a classical pianist was immediately
found. "It was easier to produce an
accomplished artist than it was to get a
machine," recalls Patricia Adams.
Similarly, several talented and creative
jazz musicians were found to play for
performances and classes. They
became important members of the
festival.
At the Theatre of Railway Workers
in Yaroslavl, we were invited to watch
a dance class for Yaroslavna, a traditional
Russian dance group that I had
visited earlier in the year. During the
Soviet system, this company of young
women specialized in learning traditional
dance forms from all of the republics
of the Soviet Union.
Performances at the festival were
held every night and sometimes in the
afternoon as well. Enthusiastic audiences
of a thousand or more repeatedly
filled the theatre to capacity. I had
never expected such a response. The
audience expressed their appreciation
with intensity and creativity, and some
ran up on stage to hug and kiss the
performers and give them flowers,
drawings, and small gifts. Evenings
were divided between programs by all
Russian groups and all Western
groups. The final evening presented
collaborations between the two groups
that developed during the festival.
Russian Participants
A number of Russian dance and
movement companies made especially
important contributions to the festival.
I had a challenging time finding experimental
and modem-oriented individuals
and performers. Members of The
Great Net theater company with whom
the initial idea for the festival originated
in 1991 were now somewhat scattered—several
of them had changed
careers and some of the women now
have young children. However, Alexander
(Sascha) Girschom and Oleg
Ignatevo helped with the organizing of
the festival by working for Concern
"IKAR" as volunteers. The Great Net
also gave a workshop called The History
of the Great Net and Sascha
Girschom taught a workshop called
The Spaces of the Body. Jan Raukh
came from Moscow to participate.
They are grateful for their Contact
Quarterly subscriptions; one issue arrived
the week before the festival.
Everyone marveled at a letter to the
editor about the upcoming festival.
Saira Blanche Theater is a group of
artists based in Moscow. They contacted
me at the suggestion of Natanja den
Boeft in Holland who had written to
me several years prior, after my first
article in CQ. For ten years, members
of this group have worked with movement,
music, sound, and the voice in
experimental theatre. They explore
different environmental spaces and
three years ago started to work with
New Dance and Contact Improvisation.
They opened the first "Contact Club"
in Moscow. They are currently very
eager to find people who work with
the deaf and movement. At the festival,
they performed and participated in
classes.
Margot Mink Colbert remarked
that 'The Saira Blanche Theater exhibited
the kind of commitment, focus,
and intensity that we experienced in
New York in the sixties and seventies.
As an avant-garde theater, they are
into a total life participation, you
know, art as life...rather than being
professionally oriented towards the
production of art They are living life
as an art.... They have a kind of cooperative
headquarters with a studio
space..."
Jeanne Ruddy, a member of the
faculty at the Juilliard School in New
York City, told me about several interesting
Russian companies that she had
met at an American Dance Festival
event in Moscow three years ago. She
was a wonderful resource. She recommended
the Kontrasty (Contrasts)
Dance Theatre from Petropavlovsk-
Kamchatsky on the eastern side of
Russia in Kamchatka, near the Aleutian
Islands.
The mayor of the town of Petro-
pavlovsk-Kamchatsky paid for twenty-
six young women from Kontrasty
Dance Theatre, choreographer Inna
Kominskaya, and director Elena Kor-
mochi to make the nine-hour flight to
Moscow from Kamchatka and the five-
hour train ride to Yaroslavl Kontrasty
presented a fascinating evening-length
performance of material derived in part
from modem dance techniques studied
briefly by one their teachers in England
and Germany, then interpreted at
home in Kamchatka. Their work was
remarkable, especially considering the
Russian lack of exposure to Western
dance developments throughout the
last century. Beth Soil, Boston- based
choreographer, said, "They claimed to
work within the [Martha] Graham
aesthetic, but you could see that their
lyrical way of approaching Graham
made it something else. They reminded
me of birch trees...."
Jeanne Ruddy had also highly recommended
the Provincial Dance
Company from Ekaterinburg, Russia.
We had several middle-of-the-night
phone conversations while I was still in
America. They were excited about
attending, yet chose to withdraw the
week of the festival. We were unable
to meet their demands for extremely
large amounts of yellow sand (from
where? how to move it?) for the stage.
They also wanted the stage to be painted
before their arrival in alternating
black and white panels. Their withdrawal
was a great disappointment.
They did travel to the American Dance
Festival in Durham, North Carolina last
summer where they were able to have
their stage demands met and were well
received as an avant-garde movement
performance group.
The local participants from the
Yaroslavl region were mostly ballet and
traditional Narodnaya (People's) Folk
Dance. Since there were few individuals
in our Western group from traditional
dance backgrounds, especially
balletic traditions, I was nervous about
finding well-matched counterparts for
them. Margot Mink Colbert, director of
Ballet Colbert in Nevada, observed that
"it was not within the scope of the First
International Festival of Movement and
Dance on the Volga to connect with the
mainstream ballet world, but instead to
explore the work of unaffiliated creative
artists, including smaller ballet
companies and artists doing experimental
work." The festival was a significant
event for everyone in that it
dramatically underlined the cultural
and attitudinal differences that Americans
and Russians have toward dance.
The Post Gallery came to the Concern
"IKAR" office several days before
the festival started and asked to do a
performance. They were a group of
male artists who had been underground
(literally, in a basement space
behind several locked doors) since well
before Glasnost. They showed a work
of performance art that related to their
rather nationalistic interests, often
tongue in cheek and quite genuine, in
exploration and expression of the previously
banned Orthodox religion. They
were interested in ritual, even had
developed their own manifesto. One of
their members had composed an opera
about Pugo, one of the leaders of the
coup that attempted to overthrow
Gorbachev. (Pugo committed suicide.
The rest have since been released from
prison.)
'The aspect of the festival that most
captured my imagination was the opportunity
it provided for independent
artists and choreographers to show
each other their work. It was fascinating
to watch the emergence of the Russian
underground art scene that I had
previously only glimpsed over the past
ten years/' Margot said.
There was also a group of teenage
boys and girls from Pereslavl-Zaleski,
Russia, who performed in hip-hop
style to American rap music They had
watched videotapes and created their
own choreography, an unusual blend
of their interpretation of the dance
style with an strong, utterly recognizable
Russian quality of solidity and
pride to their movement.
North American and European
Choreographers
The North American and European
choreographers' works represented
both new and traditional trends in
Western dance. Since there were twenty-five
Western participants, each of
whom had much to offer, I will describe
only some of them and their
offerings in order to provide a feel for
the range of abilities and interests.
• Aria Edry, artistic director of Kinetic
Environments Company based in New
York City, taught a workshop called
Cellular Movement Exploration and
did a solo performance.
• Eleanora Allerdings, a German performer
from Holland, performed her
choreography, Piece on F...
• Jane Bulger, a Boston-based artist
and co-founder of the Abydos Movement
Collective, led a group of performers
from different countries in the
creation of a collaborative movement/
performance work performed at
the end of the festival.
• Susanne Brian, a German artist, presented
her new choreographic work,
The Blind, a trio with German artists
Babette Kunze and Rebekka Torp, inspired
by the work of Maurice Maes-
terlinck.
• Patricia Adams, artistic co-director of
Dances by Isadora dance company,
based in Foxborough, Mass., taught
and performed a concert with ten-year-
old Katya Golubkova, whom she had
met in Moscow the previous January at
an Isadora Duncan Retrospective.
• Maigot Mink Colbert, assistant
chair, Department of Dance Arts, University
of Nevada, Las Vegas, performed
a solo accompanied by two
Russian jazz musicians, and co-led,
with Achmed Valk, an improvisatory
workshop that culminated in a cross-
cultural performance.
• Mary Ganzon, an artist from Austin,
Texas, taught Contact Improvisation
and a workshop entitled Unfolding the
Body's Story, and performed a solo
inspired by Kaspar Hauser.
• Kathryn Labelle of Vancouver,
considered one of Canada's leading
dance artists, performed solo works
and taught classes in modem dance
technique.
• Gloria Llompart, a dance artist from
Puerto Rico, attended with her seven-
teen-year-old daughter, photographer
Alexia Rodriguez. Gloria taught a
movement workshop in a style rooted
in investigations of improvisational
forms, Caribbean rhythms, and interactive
responses. She also choreographed
a cross-cultural group piece
that was performed at the festival.
• Marian Sarach, a dance artist from
New York City, who had just returned
from a year of teaching modem dance
at the Prague Conservatory of Dance
and at the Academy of Performing
Arts, taught Contact Improvisation and
performed solo works.
• Beth Soil, director of the Boston-
based Beth Soil & Company, gave a
lecture on the "Relationship of Movement
and Meaning" and taught a
workshop on the Interdependence of
Technique, Improvisation, and Composition.
She performed a concert of solo
works. This included the solo Zerkolo-
Mirror, based upon her sense of the
impact of her Russian heritage on her
creative work.
• Achmed Valk, director of dance at
Kansas State University, Manhattan,
Kansas, presented his recently finished
videodance project, ENTROPY—REVERSE
TO OMEGA, and co-taught
with Margot Mink Colbert a workshop
in nontraditional movement composition
that culminated in performance.
He also performed in an improvisational
trio with Margot and Kathryn
LaBelle.
Several participants, whom people
in Yaroslavl eagerly awaited, were unable
to attend for various reasons and
were sorely missed. I heard their
names mentioned on the street and in
festival audiences by Russians who had
read the newspaper publicity about
them and hungrily anticipated their
arrival.
The Future
One of my goals for the festival
was the development of future projects
between participants. I wanted to
provide an opportunity for artists to
meet, collaborate, and continue to build
upon their relationships, both personally
and professionally. This goal is
being realized with a number of projects.
Margot Mink Colbert and Achmed
Valk oversaw the editing of twenty-two
hours of videotape taken by festival
videographer Brian Leonard from Austin,
Texas. Mary Ganzon also worked
on the project. This independently
initiated and produced documentary
was completed in the spring of 1994
and is being distributed by Achmed
(see ad in this issue).
An artistic exchange is in the planning
stages between the Kontrasty
Dance Theatre from Kamchatka, Beth
Soil and myself.
Patricia Adams of Dances by Isadora,
along with Svetlana Dilmukoe-
ova, director of Music School n.l in
Yaroslavl, will begin a performance
tour of performing arts schools on the
Golden Ring and in Moscow in April
1995.
It is my wish to make the festival a
biennial event and to shift its location
to different areas in Russia and the
former Soviet Union. I am attempting
to move the 1996 festival to St. Petersburg,
or possibly to Perm, Russia (in
the Urals). It is also my hope to gain
more financial backing for my projects,
as organizing a festival alone is an
exhausting undertaking!
Farewells
On the last night of the festival we
had a farewell banquet, Russian style,
with lots of dancing, vodka, speechmaking,
and dinner. The next day everyone
loaded up into a large bus for
the long trip to the Moscow Airport. It
was a sad time, as people said their
goodbyes and exchanged addresses. I
was exhausted, wracked with many
different emotions, and feeling self-
critical about what I felt I hadn't accomplished
during the festival. A
young woman named Anya shyly
came up to me. I had met Anya in a
crowded restaurant/bar earlier in the
week. She and her friends had invited
me and my friends to share their table
since there were no empty tables.
Complete strangers, they expressed
great interest and excitement in the
festival, and by coincidence they were
dancers. I invited them to come to
classes and to meet people.
On the last day when Anya came
up to me she told me that getting to
take classes, meet people, and be a part
of the festival was the best thing that
had ever happened to her. The sincerity
and depth of her appreciation
touched me deeply, in an inexpressible
way—as did that of so many of the
festival participants. These are the
kinds of memories that inspire me to
continue creating opportunities for
dancers and artists to work together in
Russia in spite of the many difficulties,
challenges, and hardships.

---------------------

TOUCHING ART an approach to making tactile sculpture


by Rosalyn Driscoll


A man embraces a bronze
cube, laying his cheek on the smooth
edge, eyes closed. A woman leans
against a steel slab, one hand slowly
tracing its surface. They are exploring
sculptures made to be touched as well
as seen.
A few years ago I conceived the
notion of making tactile sculpture.
This direction in my work evolved out
of working in handmade paper and
more recently with book forms, which
have to be handled to be known. It
was a small but radical step to consider
touch as integral to the aesthetics of
the work. I knew little about tactile
perception, so I began research which
led naturally to working with people
who are blind, in particular with
Diedre Muccio, a woman who had
trained as a visual artist before losing
her sight. We worked closely for a
year, exploring my own work and artwork
in museums, inquiring into the
process and nature of tactile perception,
and kept journals of our experiences
(see “Eyes and Hands” following).
The first sculptures I made used a
variety of durable, sensuous materials
(bronze, wood, steel, leather, paper) to
engage the senses and to satisfy different
perceptual tastes. They are designed
to work with the natural abilities
and anatomies of shoulders, arms,
wrists, hands, and fingers to stimulate
a range of movements and to explore
the dual nature of touching—our left
and right sides.
Visual and tactile aspects are made
to be equal in integrity and interest.
Because sight and touch yield such
different information, I had to learn to
think with my hands as well as my
eyes, rather like learning to speak two
languages at once, languages that don’t
share all the same words.
At the beginning, I was determined
to have a tactile equivalent for every
visual phenomenon. This proved to be
difficult. For example, I didn’t know
how to make tactile versions of color.
I soon abandoned the notion of tactile
and visual correspondences, realizing
how different the two modes are.
Touch reveals different qualities
and realities than sight, sometimes
corresponding, sometimes conflicting,
sometimes just different. Texture,
temperature, and surface modulations
often go undetected by the eye.
Shapes and spaces take on different
aspects when felt by hands. This is a
fully three-dimensional experience.
By physically tracing, gripping, holding,
travelling over and around an
object, we have a more vivid spatial
and kinesthetic understanding. The
body is engaged. Feelings arise from
different places within us.
Like a very small, subtle dance,
touching an artwork awakens our
bodies to the world at hand. Underneath
the sensuous surfaces lies an
invitation to attend to the body’s ways
of knowing, often unexercised and
unconscious. One woman, on approaching
the sculptures with her eyes
closed, felt anxious—how would she
know?—and then, at the first touch,
she felt joy at the knowing.
Touch provides a direct, intimate
relationship with the artwork. Meanings
are based in movements and
sensations. Unlike the distance inherent
in looking, by touching, we join
the sculpture, sometimes briefly assuming
the qualities of the object:
feeling, for example, tall and thin as
we touch a tall, thin sculpture, or
spacious inside as we explore an interior
space, or balanced as we find a
symmetrical pattern. Often the object
suggests specific associations and
memories, and sometimes it is the
very motion of touching that evokes
memories or feelings associated with
that motion, like playing an instrument,
or making love.
I constantly bear in mind the anatomy
and kinesiology of fingers, hands
and arms as I work on the sculptures.
How different it is to feel something
between both hands or to use each
hand independently; to keep a straight
line from elbow to fingertips or to
bend and rotate at the wrist; to move
horizontally or vertically; to travel
along a surface or through space. The
sculptures are like scores for improvisation,
designed to provoke a range of
movements.
I set three sculptures into a small
exhibition called “The Art of Touch,”
which is travelling to art museums. At
the exhibit, sighted people are offered
blindfolds or invited to close their
eyes, not to simulate blindness, but to
focus on touch. By touching the
artwork before seeing it, the viewer is
in the novel situation of coming to
know a complex work of art solely
through touch. Viewers who wear the
blindfold or close their eyes give up
the control and certainty provided by
sight, a condition that sharpens our
attention and awareness, bringing us
back into our bodies and into our
internal, private selves. Released from
the literalism of sight, the imagination
is free to enter in, with fewer boundaries
limiting its play. As our hand
moves along a groove on a surface,
not knowing where or how it will end,
it seems endless, the way an unfamiliar
road always seems longer. The
imagination leaps into this time-space
of not knowing, ready to elaborate,
associate, or even invent scenarios.
One woman’s hand reached a position
inside a sculpture where she wasn’t
touching any surfaces. Instantly, she
felt herself in a void, standing in the
wind on a mesa.
We tend to attribute objectivity
and certainty to sight, but when we
have a tactile image of a sculpture that
is very different from the visual one,
as people who use the blindfold often
do, we realize we are creating our own
version of the object. We realize that
sight does not tell the whole story or
the only story. As one viewer described
his experience, “By touching
the sculptures before seeing them, I
have the opportunity to juxtapose the
two realities, to feel them as equal in
weight.” One woman felt, with eyes
closed, the rectangular, architectural
contours of one piece, and pictured a
forest with a mossy floor. She was
astonished to open her eyes to an
ordered, geometric structure. In this
simple, direct way people often grasp
the creative nature of perception.
Each person responds differently to
each sculpture and to the tactile experience,
bringing his or her particular
history and ways of being to the encounter.
Everyone moves in a unique
way, notices different parts, prefers
different textures, even imagines different
structures. People have pictured
the same stepped wooden surface as
canyon walls, Islamic garden, urban
landscape.
People approach the process of
tactually exploring a sculpture in different
ways. I have discerned two
main modes, which I call mapping and
sensing. Mapping is building a coherent
image of the forms and structures,
observing locations, relations and
dimensions. Sensing is feeling sensations
and qualities without concern for
the overall image. While mapping and
sensing are not mutually exclusive,
they do seem to have a figure-ground
relationship: a viewer is primarily in
one mode or the other at any given
moment. One man (blindfolded) agonized
over trying to see with his
hands, to create a visual image. Finally
he gave up and accepted what his
hands had to offer, dropping into a
deep experience of sensation.
Coming to know an object through
touch happens over time, in a slow,
linear, cumulative gathering of information,
like watching dance or listening
to music. Looking takes time too,
but our eyes move so swiftly, with
such little effort, that we aren’t usually
aware of the process. So different is
this pace from the relatively instantaneous
grasp of sight that some people
have an altered sense of time. Space
takes on the face of time.
Because seeing and the seen carry
such authority in our culture, this
experience offers a needed balance. In
his book on coming to terms with his
blindness, Touching the Rock, John
Hull concludes, “A blind person is
simply someone in whom the specialist
function of sight is now devolved upon
the whole body, no longer specialized
in a particular organ.” He refers to
himself as a “whole-body-seer.” Overdependent
as we are on sight, we need
to learn more about whole-body seeing.
At its most profound, this experience
challenges the hegemony of the
self we locate in the eyes and brain.
We are engaged physically, drawing
on our bodily knowing. This work
offers a small antidote to the increasingly
disembodied lives our technology
and our education are shaping,
opening us to new—though really very
old—ways of knowing and being. ★

Comments:

It resembles an experience I had in the
past, a feeling of being lost in a
dream. This experience is very fundamental,
very basic, or primitive, different
from more intellectual experiences
or even emotional ones. It’s more
direct, therefore it’s stronger.
I’ve never had a sense of rhythm in art
before, my hands moving in time.
Makes me think of Sankai Juku, the
Japanese theater troupe, the way
things appear on the margins, the way
things unfold into something else.
The scale is fixed with sight; in the
imagination it can be very big or very
small.
There is no physical reality. Not only
on a psychic level is the world plastic
and not concrete, but physically as
well. On a feeling level, things exist
completely differently than visually.
By touching first, I have the opportunity
to juxtapose those two realities,
to feel them as equal in weight.
There was a visual field of darkness
with the blindfold. As soon as my
hands went inside the opening, the
visual field suddenly went much blacker,
like from charcoal grey to velvet
black.
Such a dynamic experience, very deep
with curiosity and anxiety.
There are so many emotions attached
to the closeness and innocence of
touch.
I was surprised to find such pleasure
in hard edges, square corners; it
emphasized the organicness of my
body. I felt huge in relation to their
scale, and not human.
I used both hands, outside hand trying
to make sense in relation to the inside
hand; pleasure in finding hands join.
I never considered touching in another
atmosphere than the intimate.
I got closer to the artist’s process in
the studio; the artist touches all the
time.
Wow! What an experience! I lost all
sense of balance. Very strange. I
found myself only being able to use
one hand, not both—too much information.
I remember them kinesthetically but
not so much visually, and I usually
have a strong visual memory. I remember
a very deep hole in one, and
going down that hole, but it didn’t
look that deep. What I remember is
the way it felt, not the way it looked.
The experience of these pieces is like
dry leaves at the point of breaking. It
was exciting to my body, that is also
mind, to be with the sculptures.
One of them was like swimming in a
lake—not knowing what was on the
bottom. I wanted to jump in the water
again and again.
The room is burnished in a kind of
light, and the pieces are burnished in
the eyes-closed place.
Before my husband and I were married
I would close my eyes and touch
his body, his face, so if something
happened where I wouldn’t see him
again, his image would remain in my
hands, in my body and mind. This
exhibit reminded me of this experience.
Very meaningful and memorable.
It is part of me.
I had visually explored the sculptures
a month ago, and so knew what the
forms were. Going through without
sight, the forms seem much larger,
deeper and wider.
I had a moment of rest, like touching
a woman’s body, a sense of peace and
ease. I realized kinesthetic peace is
more real to me than visual.
Ordinary objects will never feel the
same again.
How lively in the gallery—everyone
talking through his or her discovery.
I was struck by the intensity of the
smells.
It’s like the difference between seeing
the movie and reading the book.



Eyes and hands
The following was written by Rosalyn Driscoll, a visual artist and creator
of The Art of Touch exhibition, and Diedre Muccio, who trained as an
artist before becoming blind, to describe their collaborative exploration
of the perceptual processes involved in being with art
RO Z: A few years ago I conceived the notion o f making sculpture that can be touched, sculpture
that asks tactile questions as well as visual. I knew little about tactile perception, so I sought out
the experts: people who are blind. By great good fortune I found a woman who had been trained
as a visual artist before losing her sight to an inherited retinal disorder. We agreed to work together
to investigate tactile perception and the development o f aesthetic touch.
DIED RE: After art school, I had plunged into a world of half-deciphered shadows. As the visual
realm slipped away, so did the excitement and pleasure I had always taken in the world around me,
perceived and interpreted through my eyes and endlessly transformed in my mind into images of my
own creation. The balance between beauty and horror was tipped to the dark side, leading me to
mistrust my remaining senses and judgment. After a difficult fifteen years of adapting to this cultural
and psychological deprivation, a gateway to the old fascination opened as Roz and i began to work
together and I once more started to think about the function of art and my place w ithin that w orld.
Because I wanted to make my work accessible to people who are blind as well as sighted, I needed
to know how a work of art is read by touch alone: what effect different materials have; what effect
size has; how connections are made from part to part; whether abstract art can be meaningful; how
meaning is formed; if and how images are made from touching; how tactile information relates to
visual information.
W e began by my evaluating Roz's sculpture from a tactile point of view , giving her feedback on what
made sense, what was interesting, and even what was disagreeable. These pieces, w hich were not
made with tactile viewing in mind, were difficult for me. In one sculpture my hands couldn't travel
fo r long without running into metal slabs; it was aggravating to encounter the blockage and made me
want to remove my hands from the whole piece.
We traveled to art museums to explore a wide variety o f sculptures through touch, and to observe
different museum experiences. She touched, usually with gloves on, reporting her experience as I
took notes.
Diedre was extremely articulate, detailed, and candid in describing what worked and didn't
work for her and why, what effect different sculptures and parts o f sculptures had on her, and what
associations, images, and questions arose for her.
Sometimes I was also allowed to touch, and we could compare our impressions. I was often
astonished how different the tactile images were from the visual, such as a David Smith sculpture o f
aluminum cubes stacked at odd angles: cool, hard, rational volumes to the eye, but to the hand,
unexpectedly warm, sensuous surfaces with mysterious spaces between the cubes.
I was often frustrated in trying to understand what was under my hands. A Picasso head had ears,
mouth, eyes, and hair that were anything but in proportion and hardly decipherable to my touch. A
large classical figure was too big to make sense of the whole; I had to trace the shapes from some
recognizable reference point, like a foot.


To my surprise, Diedre had to learn how to touch art, just as I did. Aesthetic touching is not a
common activity for anyone, blind or sighted, and requires skills that can be learned, just as visual
skills can be. She learned to take time, to move through frustration, to keep exploring even after
identifying what something was, and I had to learn to trust this new sense to provide its own
meanings, perhaps quite different from the visual meanings.
I noticed my impressions would often change from moment to moment. First a surface felt convex
then immediately concave; sometimes the same surface felt silky and then rough and dry. How does
one “know" what something is? The lack of fixity alarmed and perplexed me, but Roz and other
artists said this is the nature of experience. I remembered that I once felt this way, and now must
again become used to this flux, this time as experienced through touch.
We tried to track the process in the moment of erception: exactly how did she come to understand
the object? Do different kinds of information come from different ways of touching? How much is
just pleasure in the sensations and how much is figuring out the forms and relationships?
I began to develop a method of exploring the works, especially the larger sculptures whose parts were
harder to make out. I learned to go beyond identification of parts to a feeling for the aesthetic
possibilities and meaning. Touching an Indian sculpture in sandstone evoked the smell of desert sands
and delicate spices, the figure made me think of a living woman, not an inanimate object.
I learned that the more time I gave to a piece the easier it was to let it grow on me and even get
under my skin. After casual exploration of a smooth abstract bronze, I was ready to leave it, but on
being encouraged to persist, I gave it all I could, soon falling into a rhythm with the flow of its lines,
and it took me on a roller coaster ride.
Sometimes after leaving a museum after two hours of touching, I felt intoxicated, compelled to
touch everything around me. I would hold these sculptures in memory like a storehouse of interesting
objects I could continue to turn over in my mind.
I wrote about my experience after each session, documentation that provided useful feedback for
docents and educators in the museums as well as articulating our findings and questions for ourselves.
As I developed models of new sculptures, Diedre would feel them to let me know what was
unpleasant, confusing, or overly complex. Her responses gave me clarity about how to proceed;
and new ideas for solutions to problems.
These collaborative perceptual investigations led to my making a series of three tactile sculptures
which now form a small travelling exhibition, The Art of Touch. Our work together was essential to
the making of these sculptures, the structure of the exhibition, and to my ongoing work as a
sculptor. I now include tactile considerations and questions in all my work, which I find both limits
and immeasurably enriches my choices, giving the work fuller dimensions.
I have come to feel that sculpture, as tactually experienced, is an exciting medium for transmitting
the kinds of ideas I had always believed only a visual image could contain. I no longer feel at a loss
to live life fully, with the artistic world once more returned to me through tactile perception, with its
potential for exploring new forms, and for triggering rediscovery of all the forgotten and neglected
forms common to our experience of art and of life itself.

---------------------

DANCING AND CLIMBING MOUNTAINS

by Dina McDermott

choreographic processes
After years of living and working in the Midwest,
my life/dance partner J. Meredith (Marty) Ponte and I
decided to relocate to the Seattle area in July, 1993. As a
“thirtysomething” with several years of university dance
teaching experience behind me, moving to Seattle seemed a
risky, at times intimidating, prospect. On the other hand, a
large part of our decision was based on a desire to integrate
our dance, body therapies and outdoor/recreation
passions. Seattle’s small, self-contained neighborhoods,
mountain views, international music scene and innumerable
folksy coffee houses combine to create a sense of expansiveness
unusual for a large city. A move to the “Emerald
City” seemed like an affirmation, had the potential to help
us start a new chapter of our lives, one which would elicit
the best from us and encourage us to grow.
Seattle is a city whose “aura” is a million shades of
gray. Constantly shifting clouds and mists unveil mountains
and waterways, ever-changing vistas seen from various
vantage points in our urban village. A full year has
passed since our move, and in retrospect, we acknowledge
that it has taken a full year for our souls to arrive where
our bodies have long become acclimated. To hasten this
process, we’ve been undertaking new choreographic adventures,
performing our work for highly appreciative audiences,
and pursuing careers in dance education and kinetic
sciences.
A favored way for us to relax, revel in and explore the
outlying environs quickly presented itself; every weekend
we would pick a different mountain to climb. The Cascade
and Olympic Ranges are within an hour’s drive of our
apartment. Although some would counsel against dancers
participating in extracurricular sports/fitness activities
which might endanger their ability to dance, we had the
opposite experience: what started as a casual pastime has
afforded us many dance-affirming experiences. Climbing
through old growth forests, skirting glacial shapes, examining
spooky, hanging mosses and passing a waterfall taller
than Niagara have inspired movement imagery which could
never be experienced in a dance studio. The aerobic demands
of climbing 7,000 feet, including walking through
knee deep snowfields in sometimes near-freezing temperatures,
have made barre work and partnered lifts seem easy.
The demands and rewards of exploring the open range
inspire further aesthetic risk taking, making us more daring
in our improvisations.

During the course of an early climb up Crystal Mountain,
near the border of Mt. Rainier National Park, I was
struck by the similarities between our two choices for
physical expression: choreography and mountain climbing.
Some of these common characteristics are:
♦ The hardest part is getting started. No amount of
preparation nor discussion can substitute for the process
itself, the initially arduous, sometimes tentative,
invigorating, ultimately rewarding, step-by-step process.
♦ More importantly, you have to love the process
itself—every footfall, every bend in the trail, every
choreographic detour and experiment, every twisted
switchback and every new phrase of movement
which reveals itself to you.
♦ This can only be undertaken by you. Even though
fellow climbers/artistic collaborators are helpful, the
contribution of the individual is key in the choreo-
graphic/climbing process.
♦ Initial inspiration, preparation and energy for a
climb/choreographic project are important for getting
started. But in the long run, making it “to the top”
can only be accomplished by perseverance, a strong
constitution, ingenuity, strength of will and a vision.
♦ Flexibility of climbing plans and willingness to improvise
make the journey more enjoyable, serendipitous,
increasing the possibilities for new discoveries.
♦ While on the trail(s) and in the studio, I’ve noticed
that everyone works at their own pace. Body types,
temperament and individual metabolism may have an
influence on this pacing. Some climbers/creators
forge ahead, constantly focusing on and anticipating
the goal. Others meander slowly, enjoying the
climb, savoring the unique aspects of each moun-
tain/dance. There is great value and significance in
discovering one’s own pace of moving.
♦ There is a spirit of camaraderie common to both
climbers and dancemakers, a spirit bom of the patience
and resolve required to see the project
through. Afflictions such as sore muscles, bug bites,
abrasions and bruised egos (while attempting unfamiliar
movements or mountains) create bonds
amongst the participants.
To feel a sense of tangible accomplishment, we have, of
late, been keeping a list of mountains we have climbed.
Concurrently, we’ve been keeping a separate, detailed list
of dance repertory we’ve created. We found that it was
difficult to remember and list dances chronologically.
What appears as a single title on a page was the culmination
of an adventure which required months of convoluted
rehearsal schedules, frantic musical research, and endless
experimentation. Yet, looking at our list, all these dances
seem to have the life span of a soap bubble.
Perhaps that is why mountain climbing appeals to us:
that feeling of exhilaration one has at arriving at the moun-
taintop after hours of tramping up the trail, confers a simple,
distilled, and peaceful gratification. One can achieve
this so rarely in dance! Maybe this can be experienced
during an opening night reception, or perhaps at a dress
rehearsal when one can see that a dance “holds together”
or “takes on a life of its own.” Or sometimes during an
improv, the intention and intuition of a moment synergis-
tically combine to create forces which are palpable, a
confluence of energies made visible. Achieving a sense of
accomplishment in dance may be all the more rewarding
for its rarity and intensity.
Scanning our mountain and dance lists conjures images
of faces and places, feelings of new muscles and mountains,
and most vividly, lessons learned. Not only do we
learn more about our craft, we become more concise and
clear about what we have to say. Each mountain/dance is
a step in a journey, which, at its core, is a process of learning
about oneself, a path which circles back to the empty
studio and the bottom of the trail, eager to start again.

---------------------

MOBILITY JUNCTION FESTIVAL 1994

by Katherine Marx

Festival of mixed ability dance in N.Y.C. 
Mobility Junction moves fast.
In December 1993, the New York City
mixed ability dance group performed
for the first time. One year later,
Mobility Junction organized an international
festival of mixed ability dance
from December 2 to 4 in New York
City. The festival included a performance,
a two-day dance workshop and
a symposium, "Dance and Disabilities:
Challenging our Concepts of Dance,
Communication and Beauty." The
festival was organized by Teri Carter,
and co-sponsored by Movement
Research, in conjunction with the
3rd Annual Improvisation Festival
NY/1994.
Mobility Junction (MJ) is directed
by Teri Carter, who formed the project
in 1993. MJ has a performance company
of seven dancers with different
physical abilities. The members are
lone Beauchamp, Kumhee Hong, Bruce
Jackson, Elliot Schloss, Scott Waldron,
and myself.
Mobility Junction is the first and
only mixed ability dance project in
New York. The group is actively
building a community of students and
supporters and informing the public
about our work. The festival was MJ's
most ambitious interaction with the
public so far.
MJ has been perceived as marginal,
challenging and scary to dancers. One
of the goals of the festival was to reach
out to the New York dance community.
"I'm interested in that 'dancer's block'
to dancing with people with disabilities,"
said Scott Waldron. "A lot of
able-bodied dancers tell me they are
not the slightest bit interested in this
work." Organizing the Mobility Junction
Festival in conjunction with the
larger Improvisation Festival/NY was
a way to make it easily accessible to
dancers involved with the Improvisation
Festival.
Reaching out to people who are
disabled was also a priority of the
Mobility Junction Festival. In the past,
MJ worked primarily with disabled
people who were already performers
or athletes. Now the group is establishing
contact with people with disabilities
who don't have this previous
experience.
Involving people with disabilities
in mixed ability dance can be difficult:
Take me for example, I have a disability,
and for a long time I never
noticed I could dance. Many people,
especially disabled people, are
not open to dance. They are afraid
to show their bodies to other people.
Many disabled people stay at home,
and they are isolated. There is no
disabled community in New York.
How do we find these people?
-Kumhee Hong
MJ has tried a variety of publicity
tactics. The most effective approach
has been the most basic one, a grassroots
effort of encouraging friends to
get involved, passing out fliers on the
street and speaking to disabled people
in public places.
Mobility Junction is pioneering
mixed ability dance in New York, but
mixed ability dance has been happening
for several years all over the world.
MJ's work has been especially influenced
by mixed ability projects on the
West Coast of the U.S., including
DanceAbility workshops organized by
Alito Alessi and Karen Nelson, and
Diverse Dance Research Retreats organized
by Karen Nelson.
For the festival we invited Lori B
and Riccardo Morrison of California,
and Stina K. Bollman and Contact 17 of
Hamburg, Germany to perform and
teach. Lori and Riccardo have performed
and taught in mixed groups,
and Stina is the founder and director of
Contact 17, a mixed abilities group
including Jo Apel, Sandra Doehren,
Michael Hering, Heike Wamdtke, and
others. Contact 17 performed with live
music by Station 17 at the festival.
The festival performance was an
entire evening of mixed ability contact
dance. Contact 17 performed an improvised
movement structure which
highlighted dancers' specific physical
capabilities. There was also the suggestion
of theatrical characters in their
work. In an opening duet, Sandra
explored Stina's body with her hand.
Sandra's body stayed in place, while
Stina rolled the touch along her head,
arms and back. Sandra is most mobile
in her hands and arms and she uses a
wheelchair, Stina is able-bodied. The
duet showed patience and interest by
both dancers in the exploration of the
physical possibilities of their dancing.
Teri Carter remarked:
There are amazing problems to solve
artistically in this dancing. I look
for the realness in it, the physics,
how people make choices. Sometimes
people look for impossible
finesse. I look for what is possible
and impossible, and how people
move out of touch situations, like
how you fall—even if it's only two
inches—if your hands are doing
something and you can't use your
legs to support you.
Patience and acceptance of physical
limitations are qualities of dancing
which Stina has struggled to feeL At
the festival symposium panel, she stated
that boredom was one of her main
challenges in dancing with disabled
people as the pace of the dancing was
consistently slow. However, she's
found that by slowing down, she's
finding movement which really interests
her.
Able-bodied and disabled dancers,
disabled and disabled dancers, able-
bodied and able-bodied dancers combined
in trios, duets and quartets during
Mobility Junction's festival performance.
Some combinations are more
comfortable to members of the group
that} others:
I worry when I dance with other
disabled people. I don't feel supported
and I have been hurt. It takes a
long time to learn about each other.
-Kumhee Hong
Mixed ability dancers have extensive
experience with fear and taking
risks. Bruce Jackson expressed his
awareness of risks in dancing when he
took a surprising fall at a Mobility
Junction rehearsal. Bruce, who uses a
printed alphabet board to communicate,
spelled out "I live for danger"
after the fall.
During the festival symposium,
Lori B asked the panel what was challenging
to them in dancing. Panel
members mentioned fear as a part of
their experience of dancing in mixed
groups. They mentioned fear of hurting
others and being hurt, of being
close to someone different and touching,
and of showing their body to other
people.
I support the idea of able-bodied
people using wheelchairs wholeheartedly.
Blindfolds, too. Able-
bodied people are intimidated and
frightened by wheelchairs. The
wheelchair is a part of me. I like the
idea that they want to learn all
about it. -Elliot Schloss
The workshop was team-taught by
six teachers: Teri Carter, lone Beauchamp,
Kumhee Hong, Stina Bollman,
Lori B and Riccardo Morrison. Each
teacher planned a class independently,
but many shared the goal of setting up
a safe, comfortable situation for students
to explore new and scary experiences,
such as touching each other and
supporting the weight of another person.
Classes included running tag
games, hands-on exploration of a partner'
s musculature, moving with eyes
closed, and rolling with a partner.
In the workshop, I made efforts to
allow for communication. Next
time we do a festival, I would like to
broaden the outlook, have community
events and meals and create
together more. As it happened, the
festival pointed out gaps in communication.
-lone Beauchamp
Mobility Junction members were
challenged by the festival as organizers,
dancers, teachers and hosts. The
festival inspired future activity: the
performance group will rehearse weekly,
practicing contact improvisation
skills and creating new duets and trios
for performance. We hope to expand
our activities to teaching children and
performing at new sites, such as residences
for people who are disabled. In
addition, group members will travel
this spring to Diverse Dance Research
Retreat on Vashon Island near Seattle,
and to the DanceAbility Workshop in
Eugene, Oregon. Dancers will exchange
ideas and experiences with
other mixed ability dancers and continue
the international relationships which
were a foundation of the festival.

---------------------


Thoughts on the festival performance 

by Rebecca Lepkof

The performance of the Mobility
Junction Festival on December 2,
1994 was well attended. Lots of dancers,
educators, social workers, physical
therapists. I came early to ask permission
to use my camera. I saw the lineup
of wheelchairs, felt the excitement
and heard the band rehearsing. I
wasn't sure what I would see.
The performance started. A mix of
wheelchair dancers and upright dancers
entered the stage. A lot of action:
leaps over the wheelchairs, handstands
on the chairs. The people in chairs
whirled about, meeting each other,
holding hands, making archways with
the other dancers leaping over and
under. In the foreground, the rest of
the dancers, without chairs, were on
the floor doing Contact—both able-
bodied and not-so-able supporting and
being supported as they danced together.
The band had a great beat which
added to the excitement. When the
piece ended, there was a burst of applause.
It was good.
In another piece, a group of people
seated in wheelchairs entered the stage.
They sat there for a minute... No one
knew who would stand up. And who
is to know your fate? Two stood up.
There was a duet between Riccardo
Morrison and Bruce Jackson. Riccardo
is a beautiful, strong, acrobatic, high
energy dancer. The contrast between
his prowess and Bruce's limited,
though poetic, movement (on the floor
and on his knees), was upsetting to me.
Superimposed on my inner eye, I saw
an image of Bruce upright and dancing
about. I found tears in my eyes.
Altogether, it was an interesting
performance, well-choreographed, a
creative use of the mix of movement
available. The performers had a good
time and an exciting experience. They
looked gloriously happy during the
performance.
It wasn't so long ago that disabled
people were stuck up in the attic... In
1990, the "Americans with Disabilities
Act" was passed. In 1992 it took effect—sidewalks
were leveled, buses
had lifts, schools had desks at the right
height for wheelchairs. It is against the
law to not provide access for a wheelchair
person.
♦
Upon asking people, "Would you
attend a performance of able and disabled
people (in wheelchairs) dancing?"
these were their answers:
Malvine C.: I wouldn't go. When I go to
a dance performance, I want to be inspired,
uplifted, enhanced, reminded of the history
of beauty and Art.
Elaine A.: I would go, but would be sad
and suffer through it and feel sorry for the
disabled people. But it's great of them to
do it."
Mary A.: If the show is good, interesting,
and I'll enjoy it, mobile or in wheelchairs,
tell me when it comes up.
Peter K.: Sometimes I go to a dance performance
where some of the able dancers
move like they are disabled. That's very
disappointing to me. I enjoy seeing very
well-trained dancers, well-costumed, the
stage ivell-lit, and so I would not like to
see disabled people perform.
David D.: Chairs on wheels can do a lot
of stuff. I've seen a lot of gyrations and
maneuvering with them. And if the mobile
dancers are creative and do exciting choreography,
it's fun for all participating. So
if it's that, I would love to see it."
Ruth V.: I knew it was a good thing
when the Olympics opened up competition
for disabled people, people in wheelchairs,
so now there are wheelchair people dancing.
When is the next performance? It
should be interesting.
Alicia S.: I am old, so old, I can no longer
do the things I used to do and enjoy. I
don't like to see myself in the mirror and
so I do not like to look at ago. And any
other disability. (She thought for a minute
then asked), Are they young, the
wheelchair people?
(Yes, I answered.)
Are they pretty?
(Yes, I answered.)
Well, they have a lot, youth and beauty,
which I no longer have...
Natanya W.: I very carefully choose to go
to see the finest dance concerts, the most
beautiful dancers, the most interesting
choreography, even though it's expensive.
I wish I was old enough to have seen Anna
Pavlova and Pavlov Nijinsky, sigh, sigh.
No, I would not go.
Debby S.: When we watch disabled people,
there is a fear that such a fate could
happen to us, or to our loved ones or to
our yet unborn. This makes me feel uncomfortable
and I might choose not to face
it. But still I am interested in this kind of
performance, I would like to attend. 

---------------------

FIRST CONTACT mixed ability Contact Improv. in Argentina

by Adrian Olender


---------------------

STILL MOVING—Contact Improv. shop talk and dialogue


by Adrian Olender

Thoughts after the first Contact Improvisation
experience between physically and
mentally disabled and non-disabled people,
which took place in Buenos Aires, Argentina
with Alito Alessi of DanceAbility
during October and November 1994.


For a moment, we get rid of
our masks, our ego vanishes and we
abandon ourselves to the dance to discover
our likeness.
Like children, we love
Feeling safe enough, not to be hurt,
we give way to the dance of life...
Peace, love and gentleness
A journey into ourselves...
into communion.
You and I together, creating us
A journey of revolution...
Breaking solid rocks ..steel armors...
and the best in you and me blooms.


Inclusion and exclusion are two
aspects that can be clearly seen in the
dance. Exclusion of "the other" implies
not listening to our partner and is related
to distrust, fear and defenses that
we build up due to that fear so we can
protect ourselves. Inclusion is linked to
trust, safety, giving, openness and
listening. The exclusion and the lack of
listening give way to the differences,
whereas, the inclusion allows us to find
the coincidence.
Dancing with disabled people can
help us to realize how these attitudes
work in ourselves, in our daily life and
in our dance. It allows us to face ourselves
with our own defenses, fears and
prejudices in such a way that we can
get rid of all that and let ourselves go
entirely into the dance.
We are a community of individuals.
In spite of our differences, we all have
many things in common that bring us
together: the capacity of feeling, sensing,
sharing, communicating, expressing,
loving and being loved, and dancing;
as well as a certain degree of disability.
It may be neither physical nor
mental but a disability of our heart
related with openness, giving and receiving,
communicating and expressing
freely from within, with sincerity, genuineness
and authenticity.
One way that fear, distrust, and
insecurity are expressed is in the control
and manipulation of another person.
Working with disabled people
made me aware of two possible attitudes.
On the one hand, a superiority
and control position, in which we manipulate
"the other" and we establish a
"vertical relationship." On the other
hand, the awareness of our own body
in a sensitive way establishes a "horizontal
relationship" from heart to
heart
Dancing with disabled people has
taught me a lot in this way. It can take
us away from the "beautiful shapes"
and the "big and acrobatic movements"
to regain the minimal and sensitive
movements. It allows us to
recover a humble attitude, simplicity,
sensitivity and our own essence: our
heart.

---------------------

Crash course

by Jackie Adkins

Crash Course was just that—in
both senses of the word. It was five
days of intense physical training which
incorporated the high energy dancing
and risky partner work associated with
the so-called “Euro-Crash” style of
dance/physical theatre. It was led by
Motionhouse artistic directors Louise
Richards and Kevin Finnan in July
1994, in Leamington Spa, England.
My reactions to the course varied
over the week. The days were comprised
of three elements. To begin the
morning there were repetitive strengthening
exercises for back, arms and
abdominals. The company has developed
these as part of a daily training
regime through an awareness (due to
repeated injuries) of the need for the
upper body strength required to fulfill
the demands of their contact lifting-
based work. For me, these strenuous
physical jerks came as a bit of a shock
to the system. However, my introduction
to them proved timely, as I too
have developed a recent awareness of
the need to work with more muscular
(as opposed to skeletal) awareness, in
order to protect joints and prevent injury,
prompted by an ongoing knee problem.
The second part of the morning was
comprised of learning set dance phrases
which emphasised the head-tail relationship.
Attention to alignment and release
produced flowing sequences spiralling
into and out of the floor. This presented
a particular challenge to me, for as
an improviser, I experienced a strong
resistance in mind and body to hold
onto the material and get it right. By
the end of the week, however, a concerted
mental and physical effort produced
the desired effect and I experienced
that unique satisfaction of having
gotten through the whole phrase and
feeling the exhilaration of high-energy
unison dancing.
The afternoons were given over to
learning set partnered sequences, using
skills culled from Contact Improvisation,
such as specific lifts and supports.
The frustration I experienced at learning
these movements in such a highly structured
way was countered on the last day
when we had the chance to choreograph
our duet material and add improvised
sections. Everything came together, the
advantages of a shared vocabulary and
skill base to work with, within a freer
improvisational framework which produced
some really exciting dancing in
the final duets.
Crash Course gave an insight into
the company’s unique approach. From
Contact Improvisation they have developed
a training method which facilitates
a particular style of choreographic invention
using partner work as its focus.
It was as ever a pleasure to experience
the teaching of Kevin and Louise which
is delivered with clarity, energy and
humour, conveying a sense of their
ongoing enjoyment of moving. As
Kevin so eloquently put it, “Oh, the joy
of Terpsichore!”

---------------------

Hierarchy and Elitism—dialogue
by Mark Koenig, Dan Mattson

Anne Aronov’s letter to CQ in Still
Moving last issue [CQ Vol. 20:1, Win-
ter/Spring 95] fueled a discussion at the
Harbin New Year’s Teacher’s Conference
in California a couple of weeks
ago on the topic of the politics of hierarchy
among teachers, students, and
organizers in the contact community.
Just as the bell rang to signify the end
of the discussion period, it was decided
that the real root of the discontent was
in the issue of inclusion and exclusion
that pervades the contact community,
yet about which no one will dare talk.
Another discussion resulted at the Harbin
New Year’s Jam, a couple of days
later, to address this issue.
Because I was unable to attend that
discussion, and because notes I read
from it only grazed the surface of the
issue, I’m writing in an effort to revive,
continue, and broaden the dialogue.
Let’s face it, we can’t get too content
with ourselves until after we trudge
through a little muck.
This was my very first Harbin Jam
and I had a very difficult time deciding
to go. I had always been attracted to it
and promised myself this time that I
would really do it. But a good friend of
mine, who went for the first time last
year, gave a very bad critique of the
Jam. He spoke of a certain elitism that
makes itself known at the Harbin Jam;
certain cliques and groups and gatherings
where he felt as if only those people
who were “in” were allowed to participate.
The rejection he suffered left
such a bad impression on him that he
says he will never again go to the Harbin
Jam and that he would discourage
anyone else from going. I tried to inspire
some other friends to come with
me to the Jam, but they felt they had
already been excluded by Harbin’s
prerequisite: “Participants must have a
firm grasp of Contact fundamentals.”
Though I immensely value their participation
at contact events, they felt they
didn’t have enough experience. My
attraction to go was significantly diminished,
but now my agenda at the Jam
included the responsibility of investigating
this claim of elitism.
I was very surprised to perceive
almost no sign of elitism. In fact I was
very impressed by the overall format of
the Harbin Jam, the transparency of the
oligarchy, the numerous opportunities it
allowed for each individual to speak
their mind and heart and soul, and its
responsiveness to their dreams. It was
only on the very last day of the Jam,
after the tearful closing ceremony, after
filling out a rushed evaluation form,
while packing up my tent in the rain at
dusk, that a new friend pointed something
out to me: the reason I didn’t
experience this inclusion/exclusion phenomena
was because I was somehow
already “in” from the moment I arrived.
Whatever it is I am, it somehow has the
correct age, attractiveness, skin color,
socioeconomic class, experience/skill
level, and whatever other characteristics
needed for inclusion in the contact improvisation
community. She, however,
was not so lucky. This was her third
Harbin Jam and she was only just beginning
to taste the champagne and
caviar and community of inclusion,
after years of the slop and gruel of
exclusion.
She, and most others attending the
above discussions, agreed that this “elitism”
had much less to do with any
inherent political structures or policies
of the various contact improvisation
jams, festivals, and workshops (though
some have worse reputations than others),
and much more to do with the
habitual and all-too-often-unconsciously
prejudicial behavior of the individuals
who attend them.
I did have one uncomfortable experience,
however, where not only was the
elitism made apparent, but it was apparent
that I was expected to participate in
it. The baths, pools, and facilities of
the Harbin Hot Springs community
were available for any and all the Harbin
jammers to enjoy as we wished
The Harbin Jam, however, and the
building it occupied, was off-limits to
any guest or resident of the Harbin Hot
Springs. While visiting the Hot Springs
facilities I encountered old and new
friends. Some of them were experienced
contact dancers who could not
afford the cost of the Jam. Others had
not heard of Cl but were terribly interested
to watch and learn about it. I had
the shameful duty to tell them they
were not welcome at the Jam.
My friends took it much better than
I did. “That’s great!” they said. “That
kind of closed, isolated context not only
provides a safe, secure environment for
people to explore their limitations, it
also acts like a pressure-cooker allowing
you to develop your ideas farther and
deeper than you could in a more open
context!”
Yeah, whatever. I still would rather
share. Perhaps my shame will only
serve to illustrate my own elitism. The
elite group to which I subscribe is one
that values service to and sharing with
one’s community. It believes that the
limits of one’s community are imaginary
except for their apparent existence
within the most inflated of our human
faculties, the ego. And I invite each
and every one of you to include yourselves
in my group.
This week we celebrate the birthday
of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., a man
who devoted his life to the fight for
human equality. Dr. King’s dream of
equal opportunity can hopefully inspire
us to examine, confront, and change the
patterns of discrimination we practice
today within our own community. Our
arena is not nearly as volatile as that of
King’s struggle for equal rights in the
Deep South in the 1950s and ’60s. But
because it is not nearly as visible, it is
much easier to deny. Though the contrast
between the “included” and the
“excluded” is not as sharp as that between
light skin and dark skin, the
homogeneity of our contact community
is rather conspicuous. Considering the
diverse social and cultural milieu of the
cities and towns and universities which
host our jams, classes, festivals and
workshops, should we not find it unsettling
that the vast majority of our members
are attractive, educated, agile, mobile,
employed, housed, middle- to
upper middle-class white folks, between
30 and 45 years of age, with 10% body
fat or less?
I may do well in a desegregated
society, but I can never know
what my total capacity is until I
live in an integrated society. I
cannot be free until I have had
the opportunity to fulfill my total
capacity untrammeled by any
artificial hindrance.
Dr. King’s words are as much an
inspiring code to live by as are the
fundamental principals of contact improvisation:
engage your partner, witness
your choices, take risks, build trust, stay
in the moment, lean, commit, surrender.
Dr. King’s movement was all about
reaching out to people and engaging
them, as if inviting them and including
them in his dance.
In between discussions on these hot
topics at Harbin, an idea was proposed
to form a sort of “ethics committee”
which would somehow be in charge of
monitoring and policing the choices and
rules and policies created and followed
within the contact community. I don’t
believe this is a worthwhile solution
because, after all, quis custodiet ipsos
custodes? Who will watch the watchers?
Politics, as a general rule, is a
dirty business. And rather than forming
a committee, let’s just change our ways
and lead by example.
I’m very often inspired to take a
lesson from contact dance and apply it
to the broader spectrum of human intercourse.
At the Teacher’s Conference,
Craig Schwartz was chosen to develop
material and present a class on the skill
of “trusting one’s own innate physicality
and impulses.” His material, which he
credited to Carol Swann, involved
“watching the impulses that lead you
into movement. When you recognize an
impulse and where and how it will lead
into movement, choose not to follow
that impulse, instead choose to follow
the next impulse, or the next, or the
next one after that.”
The exercise provided an invaluable
opportunity to observe the choices we
make and usually take for granted. Old
patterns can be broken down, changed,
and lifted out of their old ruts. Perhaps
we can learn to monitor the impulses
which lead us to choose with whom we
will dance, or with whom we will not
dance; whom we will include and why,
and whom we will exclude and why.
Perhaps then we can choose a different
pattern; a more inclusive one.

Sincerely,
Mark Koenig
Santa Rosa, CA


Dear Mark,
I read with interest your letter of
1/15/95. It would take some time to
respond to it in detail so instead I will
give you something of an outline of
what came up for me.
INITIATION!
When I was a Boy Scout in a small
Midwestern town in the early ’60s, at
summer camp newcomers would be sent
to the supply shack for such things as
twenty feet of shoreline or a sky hook
(the latter to support the top of a teepee
while it was being lashed together).
A few years later I heard tales of
frat and sorority initiations though I
stayed away from these organizations.
I did go up through the ranks in the
Navy. I made e-6 while having the
excellent duty of being on a reserve
training ship in San Francisco Bay. I
had no choice but to submit to being
picked up by all the senior petty officers
and tossed into the bay. (In 1972
this was conducted with enough sensitivity
that I was able to give my eyeglasses
to someone for safe-keeping as
it was happening.)
As a self-educated electrician, and
for awhile in the late ’70s having a
girlfriend who was an apprentice in the
electrical union, I have heard more than
a few stories that include the theme, “I
had to endure this to get where I am
and now I am doing it to you.”
I really don’t believe that there is
anything like this in the Bay Area contact
community.
Rather, I would say that the following,
attributed to Buddhism, which I
heard about eight years ago when I was
a beginning dancer, applies to the contact
community:
If you find someone beating
their head against the wall,
compassion is not about putting
a pillow between their head and
the wall. Rather it is about
creating a safe place for them to
explore alternatives.
I find it hard to imagine a better
description of the Harbin Jams. I will
concede that the word jam may be a bit
confusing. Often, a jam means that it is
open to the public and available for
people to drop in on even if just to
observe. First of all, the Harbin Jams
have nothing to do with Harbin Hot
Springs. We simply rent the space from
them. The jams are not listed in their
quarterly magazine; they are private
events, limited to 50 to 60 dancers.
While we have experimented with inviting
guests, we’ve had to decide it’s not
possible. I have participated in numerous
meetings at early jams where this
policy was exhaustively and painfully
arrived at. This policy is necessary and
respected. A few New Year’s Jams
ago, a meeting of teachers who were
organizing the Contact festival needed
to happen. Most of the teachers were at
the jam, so the meeting was at Harbin.
A few teachers came up just for the
meeting. It was not at the conference
center, nor did the “outsiders” come for
a dance, even though all of them were
insiders by your sense of the word.
To include Harbin residents and
guests who are curious about the form,
several of the jams have had participants
volunteer to teach a class in
Stonefront (or on the lawn in the summer)
during the course of the jam.
Why is it called a jam? Because we
co-create it We do not go there for
instruction from one or two teachers
who make this happen as part of their
livelihood.
This is not to say that there is not a
perceived “ideal/cream of the crop” of
size, strength, agility, social skill, dance
passion, emotional openness and the
like. But there is no requirement about
any of this to be an “experienced” contact
dancer.
In his book, Seven Arrows, Hyeme-
yohsts Storm relates the medicine wheel
and the four directions to personal
growth saying that while all people are
bom with some of the skills they need
to be fully realized, no one is born with
them all. He goes on to offer the vision
of a culture that supports people to
grow spiritually and emotionally, while
sharing in common material resources.
Overall, while contact is athletic in
nature, I have also enjoyed teaching it to
people who are older and less athletic as
a way of enhancing intimacy. It is also
one of many ways someone can explore
personal growth. It is not a social movement
or political party and appropriately
shares multicultural urban space with
the infinite array of ethnic, artistic, new
age, and conventional communities that
abound. Overlap is welcome! I believe
I speak for most everyone in the community
when I say that anyone who
finds what they are looking for with us
is welcome, for however long they want
to stay.
Specifically, the Harbin Jams were
conceived with the intent of building
and nurturing community.
If you would like to discuss any of
this further, please give me a call, or
find your way to the Saturday jam in
Berkeley (which I host) at Eighth Street
Studio, 2:30 to 5:30 p.m.
Harbin Jam participants come from
an economic spectrum of dancers, artists,
healers, craftsmen and the like!
Many find it an economic stretch to be
there!

Dan Mattson
Oakland, CA


---------------------

Collision, Consciousness, and Community 
by Andrew Gaines


“I’m feeling resistance in my belly
and below my genitals. Concerns of
energy spurts. So I put on energy in
my sweat shirt, in my sweat pants. I
think I’m clear about the theory of
developing energy. I feel hesitancy
about moving forward. / think I need
an extra pair of wings.”
(These words, and all following
italicized words, were spoken
several days after the accident,
from body in altered state.)
Moving forward in this life, I
have taken on an extra pair of wings.
On the morning of September 6th, I
fell asleep driving and my car drifted
into an oncoming tractor trailer carrying
eighteen tons of steel. In the stark
silence that engulfed me following the
cacophonic crash, crack, shatter, hiss
of chaos, I began to conceive wings.
In the ambulance in which blood
gushed from my forehead and I faintly
clutched at consciousness, the wings
gestated. During the early days when
my survival was questionable—when
body and soul grasped toward life
amidst surgery upon surgery—they
began to open. I broke my leg, my
arm, my nose, the orbit above the eye,
and some ribs; I lost my spleen and
my lung collapsed. One month later,
as conscious awareness and memory
gently returned to my being, the wings
began to flutter...and flutter on they
will.
Each time I previously submitted
articles to Contact Quarterly, I aimed
to further develop and bolster my
teaching and performing career. Now,
all has shifted. This near fatal accident
altered my desires in this life. I
no longer reach toward what I might
be or do; I feel joy that I just am.
With my ego-integrity flattened and
my appreciation for basic life overflowing,
I can only speak of truth and
Love. This article, then, articulates
some of the astounding things I’ve
learned and offers my gratitude to the
Contact community for its support.
(OK, desperation. Let me wander...)
As one would naturally hope, the
assistance of family and friends was
profoundly present as my body struggled
for survival. Taking over my
room and the waiting rooms on two
floors of the hospital, people engaged
in meditation, authentic movement,
expressive arts, song, individual and
group rituals and prayer. On the first
day, calls went out to people within
the Contact community across the
country and overseas; an hourly ritual
of hope and prayer was initiated.
Letters and notes of support poured in
from the East Coast Contact Jam,
Earthdance, fellow teachers, past students,
and colleagues. One friend
wrote: “Your recovery has been the
most striking manifestation of consciousness
and community that I’ve
ever seen. The whole community
around you has been kind of in awe of
itself and of your healing. Everybody
who has been in that room with you,
your family, your friends, everyone
who has called and written and sent
gifts, has been part of a loving living
that brings tears to my eyes.”
In the last months, people expressed
that the communication stimulated
by my accident affirmed their
belief in the solidity, connectedness,
and support of this Contact community.
I feel deeply touched that so many
were willing to pour out their love to
me; I recognize that it is there for
each of us. I wonder why it takes
such a near-tragic event to stimulate
and solidify the ever-present community
that holds us, and bolster our trust
in it. (The presence of the question is
the presence of ultimate fidelity.)
Three months after my accident, I
accompanied two friends to a Contact
Jam in New York City. Still low in
energy, and distant from any sense of
mobility in my body, I expected to
talk with friends on the side and
watch. When I entered the room,
however, I was touched by the heartfelt,
joyful amazement of Contact
friends about my return; the wooden
floor and moving bodies drew my
dancing spirit in. My body felt immediately
surging with energy, engaged,
and flowing with movement. It became
evident how fundamental dancing
is to me as a way of getting to
a direct, immediate, experience of
interaction and energy.
Prior to this rediscovery of movement
I had difficulty accessing feelings
of play and unbridled creativity.
Moving again, my fantasy and imagination
were liberated. Drawing upon
nonverbal and non-linear elements of
interaction opens infinite doors of
possibility. Each dance I have asks
me to be present in the ever surprising
unfolding of communication.
To this date, I do not have full use
of my leg and am sensitive in several
areas. (I’m going to toss myself out to
you. Do you want to support me by
my left foot or my right foot? Have me
in space to wander! Oh Jesus Christ.
Oh Barcelona.) This is the first time
that I have had any sort of injury or
difficulty with body movement Happily,
I have learned that contacters are
so committed to listening that I have
never felt fear that I would get hurt. I
have sensed that my partners were
aware and sensitive to the type of
movements my body could make;
working with these possibilities has
become the basis for our dance. This
seems like a gift for each of us, taking
our impediments and saying, “this is
me, and I can still have a full experience.”
In many ways, the physical trauma
introduced by this accident offered me
intimacy with my physical body. One
week prior to the accident, I gave
myself a movement intention. Moving
in the dance bam at Earthdance, I
found myself actively flying, rolling,
and bolting through space. This deep
physicality was familiar to me; I often
found myself moving in this way
without any warm-up. That time,
however, I recognized a sense of
distance from deep, conscious sensuality;
I could not feel the inner sensations
of my body. I decided, from
that moment forward, I would give
myself ample time to enter my physicality
and consciously enter body
awareness before inhabiting a highly
energetic visceral state.
This intention was superbly satisfied
by my injuries and recovery.
(Tower, in my mania, in my ecstasy!)
Deep subtle memories affirm that I
waged my own battle for cellular
survival in the surgery room for days.
I lay in my hospital bed for weeks
performing dream activities promoting
recuperative healing. I have done
physical therapy for several months,
most recently working toward realignment
of various systems through
Body-Mind Centering. Previously,
bodywork felt pleasurable; with my
new awareness and sensitivity to body
sensation, I experience a direct, visceral
level of adjustment. I have more
richly than possibly intended passed
through the entrance to internal awareness.
I am blessed with new scars which
accentuate and beautify my body. The
one on my inner forearm, ever-present
for my eyes, constantly reminds me of
the extraordinary journey I’ve been on.
One climbing from my belly button
toward the middle of my chest adds a
feeling of delicacy for fondling. The
most profound, and preferred, is over
two feet long, beginning at the knee
and extending up through the hip, a
clear testament to the dramatic intensity
of my Autumn accident. (Are you
guys OK with the gravity ? My inconsistency
is the new foam bed.) Unlike
the embarrassment of many others
bearing such stark tales of their history,
I find these scars beloved declarations
of the life I have lived. We each
accumulate, over time, specific details
of our looks and distinct personalities.
The life we lead bears extraordinary
gifts in times of need. (Hope.
We sending hope. Let my pauper
energy suck into the world.) Body
awareness enables us to cellularly embrace
and, if necessary, transform the
changes occurring in our bodies. The
fitness which comes from movement
provides us with the energy and
strength to withstand, and rapidly
recuperate from, injury. Our engagement
and curiosity supports us in
transforming seemingly unbearable
events into potential opportunities for
growth. And, as I joyfully experienced,
the community to which we
belong offers support in the personal,
material, spiritual, and artistic realms.
(So much miracle, I get better. /
get birthed. I want, want...) to thank
each generous soul who supported
the continuation of my spirit in this
body.


---------------------

How to Fly 
by Michael Linehan

Steve Paxton studied Aikido
which provided some of the core of
Contact Improvisation. I began dancing
in 1974, doing Contact regularly in
1975, in Vancouver, B.C. Contact led
me to Aikido and provided some of the
core of my practice. Circling around.
At one point in the late seventies,
I chose between these two. Aikido
provided more structure and regular
classes with high-level teachers—that
suited my style. I’ve had a total of
fourteen years in Aikido. But I still do
Contact sometimes, and I think it’s a
wonderful, profound form.
I had been teaching Contact, mostly
in the Vancouver area, up until 1979
when I stopped teaching for several
years. In 1985, 1 got re-energized back
into teaching when I saw the Canadian
dance group La-La-La Human Steps
perform Human Sex, a very dynamic,
athletic piece. I began to work with a
few dancers I knew, showing them how
to jump, lift and catch, just because it
was fun.
About a year later, I began to think
about teaching other people. I noticed
that almost nobody taught these skills to
dancers, and when it was taught, everything
was usually very external. I gradually
developed an approach which I
began to call “How to Fly.”
How to Fly includes a focus on both
external and internal practices, physical
and mental principles, and the use of
both muscle and energy. It’s really fun
sometimes to do things from Aikido
with dancers which can seem to them
reeeally strange and almost like magic.
From a beginning of just playing around
for fun, I now go to Europe every summer
to teach professional dancers.
Most of the jumps I teach I developed
in partnership with Peter Boulanger.
I take them into my How to Fly classes
and he takes them into acrobatic/circus
work with his partner, Nino Parent.
So what is ‘How to Fly’ anyway?
In dance, partner work offers an immense
range of expression. How to Fly
opens these possibilities. The course is
suitable for all dancers because we
study principles that can then be applied
to any style of movement. I’ve also
worked with theater people, clowns,
acrobats and trapeze artists.
We learn how to jump, lift, fall,
catch and support with strength, safety
and elegance. In a typical course we
study:
• the dynamic, athletic jumps which
have become popular in dance in
recent years
• more graceful and balletic lifts
• jumps and balances
• groundwork: i.e., falling, rolling,
sliding, pivoting
There are four parts to this course:
• A foundation of mental and physical
understanding is built using many
simple exercises.
• Several fundamental jumps are repeated
throughout the course to extend
basic skills.
• Conscious use of energy and mental
focus reinforce and enrich developing
physical abilities.
• A wide variety of jumps, lifts and
balances are explored to expand
possibilities and stimulate the
imagination.
In teaching How to Fly, I always
encourage participants to think of jumps
as spice. I think they can really be
overdone. I encourage people to have
the attitude that there might only be one
jump in a whole performance—but one
should be able to do it wonderfully.

PRINCIPLES
The following are a few points from
class notes, which I hand out at the end
of a session.

SAFETY is the number one principle.
Choreographers just somehow expect
dancers to be able to jump and catch!!!
Dancers expect it of themselves!!!
Where did this idea come from? No
‘technically’ trained dancer would
dream of doing less than a gazillion
contractions, plids or whatever. I emphasize
that there is a body of techniques
and skills here which need to be
practiced regularly. Perhaps the primary
thing that I ask everyone is to be
responsible for themselves and to work
at their own pace. Abilities can be
increased little by little with virtually no
risk of injury, until the person is doing
things which are incredible.
A few other basic points on safety
are:
• keep principles of safety every time,
not just at the beginning
• look after yourselves and each other,
say what you need
• full focus on each other while working
• each time is fresh, unique
• never play tricks
• practice rolling and falling regularly
ATTENTION is the next important
point. Attention is an aspect of consciousness,
and though western science
has little understanding of consciousness,
that does not hinder us from using
it very effectively.
‘Intention’ directs ‘Attention’... energy
follows attention...the body follows
the energy. We do many exercises such
as being pushed slowly on the chest by
our partner while directing the attention,
first backwards, and then forwards. Of
course, almost everyone feels a dramatic
difference.
A key point is that this ability to
direct attention, and therefore energy, is
not just an on/off thing. The ability can
be strengthened and refined with practice.
Attention can be spread widely or
focused like a laser; it can be directed
smoothly or explosively...then energy
follows. Effective use of attention gives
finesse, power and delicacy, and a quality
of presence which can be so striking
in a master performer.
ATTITUDE is very important Respect
for oneself, each other and the
practice, a vibrant spirit, a positive
atmosphere. One key idea I would like
to mention is my disagreement with the
old saying, “Practice Makes Perfect”
This statement has done great disservice
to those who believe it Instead, I teach
my students that “Perfect Practice
Makes Perfect.” I don’t mean literally
that we must be perfect, but that we
need to strive for complete sincerity and
focus every time. Imagine always training
with an alert and curious mind, fully
engaged. Sure, sometimes we don’t feel
so sharp. But on those days too, we can
decide to work with an interested attitude
of “What’s happening here? What
can I discover today?” The most familiar
techniques will become fresh, because,
in fact, they are always different.
Be prepared to let go of what you know
for what you can learn. Fill each moment
with your desire to study. Ten
repetitions like this will reward us much
more than one thousand done in “everyday
mind.” We will progress by leaps
and bounds (whatever the discipline),
and the experience of the process will
be so much richer. Our mental and
emotional states become embodied as
certainly as do our developing physical
skills.

CENTER. How I teach comes mainly
from Aikido, but the feeling is the same
as we experience in the effortless jumps
and catches of Contact. In How to Fly
we also work from the center, in catching
and in jumping. Connecting center
to center gives an increased ability to
feel, mold, play. We use the skeleton to
support the weight, the muscles to
guide: no straining, not too much energy,
but rather just the right amount used
precisely, cleanly, with relaxation. As
in Contact, sensory and motor skills are
both micro and macro. All qualities of
energy are useful (flowing or solid,
delicate or explosive, etc.) I want people
to develop the ability to choose, the
ability to move freely between many
different intensities and kinds of energy.
And breath is central. It ties together
our mind, body and energies.
PHYSICAl SKILLS
W* xwdt every v> here from melted into
the floor to ter feet in the ait. We
hoc \ as v.t Coe.'.ACt. w.th becomutg
\e;\ vvmtoruh'.e w-.tfe the floor, and
with moving into and out of the floor.
This remains the foundation. I ask
people to continue working with this
afterwards, for safety, for options, for
their own feeling of security and the
richness this comfort can bring to their
dance. We work with small weighttaking
exercises, making sure people can
support before moving into the first
small jumps. The specific exercises
come from Contact, Aikido, acrobatics
and my own invention.
As we proceed into jumping, I draw
very much from Aikido, adapting its
normal (sagittal) plane of activity to
different orientations. The stability and
strength to absorb high impact, and to
lift above the head, come from Aikido
ways of working with center. Always
I emphasize attention, energy, consciousness,
so the exercise is never just
an outward physical endeavor. We
strive for congruence, everything working
together. I want students to appreciate
that when we begin to work effectively
with these inner aspects, the outer
becomes immensely easier.
Let me give you an idea of a few
’urv.v's from How to Fly [see phxas]:
Roll-Over: spinning horizontally while
travelling through the air; half turn, 1
full turn, 2 full turns.
One-Arm: one arm high angel, jumper
on their side.
Helicopter: one arm high angel, jumper
on their belly.
Run-Away: jumper runs away from
catcher (lots of space between them)
and jumps to a horizontal layout position
on their back about five feet off the
floor as catcher runs full speed, sliding
in on knees and catching partner close
to floor.
As the class proceeds, jumps like
these are done from further and further
away, with more and more energy.
Without trying to describe details,
maybe a few more names of jumps will
evoke images: roll-under jump; delayed
roll and dropping catches; corkscrew;
hip, like wave; swan dive; dive through
ring; upside-down cross, no hands; rock
and roll to no hands; swan to back of
neck.
In contrast to the big ‘adrenaline’
jumps listed above, some of the most
fascinating and paradoxically difficult
work is with small, delicate jumps or
rides. The particular focus and finesse
required brings a very different and
satisfying feeling. These smaller movements
are quite familiar to Contacters.
When taken out of the context of Contact
Improvisation, they can be difficult
to learn, but very rewarding for people
who can grasp the quality.
I think that’s a big part of How to
Fly. Many times I’ve watched the
energy and presence of beautiful dancers
go flat as soon as they had to jump.
I want to help dancers integrate jumping
and catching into their dance; bring
their jumping skills up to the standard
of the rest of their performance; and do
it with strength, safety and elegance.
What makes each teacher’s work
unique is in the elements of experience
they choose to include in their recipe, in
the nuances of presentation, and in the
decisions they make in the flow of a
class. I hope in this sketch, I’ve given
some idea of my work; of how my
Contact seed has flowered.

---------------------

Contact & Alexander Training in Japan 
by Robin Gilmore

Students of the Alexander Technique
are drawn to that work for a
variety of reasons ranging from chronic
pain to problems in performing
daily tasks. For others, Alexander
work is about communication skills
and thinking clearly; in other words,
they desire that hard-to-define-but-we-
know-it-when-we-see-it quality called
presence. The Alexander Technique
encompasses all of the above because,
in essence, it deals with how we respond
psychophysically to stimuli.
We are creatures of habit, but often
habits serve to limit choices and flexibility.
Through studying the Alexander
Technique, new doors open. Put
simply, the role of an Alexander teacher
is to provide opportunities for
change.
In order to teach the Alexander
Technique, one must be well on the
way to understanding the relationship
between thinking and activity. In
addition, there are certain skills to be
learned with regard to seeing and
touching. The teacher needs to see
overall patterns of muscular use as
well as to detect subtle, immeasurable
movements. Alexander teachers use
their hands to guide students’ awareness
and movement in a way that is
gentle yet powerful. Learning to touch
in this specific way is complicated
enough in Western cultures; in Japan,
the challenges are myriad.
As the director of KAPPA,* the
first Alexander teacher training program
in Japan, I have had to take into
account certain cultural differences in
order for my teaching to be effective.
Language is certainly a major issue,
but my Japanese is improving slowly,
and several of the trainees are skilled
translators and share the responsibility
of translating during class. Another
factor which has both a positive and
negative side stems from the rigorous
educational system in Japan. The
trainees devote their undivided attention
to whatever is presented and take
their study seriously. For most teachers
in any field, such discipline would
be welcome, but the danger within an
Alexander class is that students will
push themselves beyond the point of
constructive learning. To prevent
glassy-eyed burnout, we take breaks:
tea breaks, moving breaks, hanging
out breaks. All a part of learning and
digesting new information.
Perhaps the biggest challenge for
those of any nationality learning to
teach the Alexander Technique lies in
developing an informed, accurate and
sensitive touch. A teacher’s hands
direct a student’s movement and flow
of energy. These skills take time,
practice and clarity of intention, not to
mention a certain degree of intuition.
In the beginning, just learning to touch
another person with a clear intention
can seem mystifying. At the moment
of contact, one’s awareness must
include one’s own psychophysical
coordination as well as visual, tactile
and auditory information from the
student. In terms of awareness, the
contact begins well before the instant
of physical touch.
All of the skills and qualities mentioned
above can be taught, but what
happens in a culture in which the act
of touching another person in public is
not only unfamiliar but intimidating?
In America, we shake hands, hug or
give high fives. In Europe, kissing
both cheeks is a standard greeting
regardless of gender. In Japan, they
bow. The nature of the relationship
between two people determines the
depth and duration of the bow, and the
action is repeated often within the
course of even a brief interaction. In
bowing, the gaze is lowered and
awareness of self diminishes. This
action contradicts Alexander principles.
In the training course, students
are challenged to feel comfortable
with themselves at their true height
while actually seeing another person.
In learning to inhibit the downward
pull associated with bowing and putting
oneself beneath others. KAPPA
trainees have had to confront the psychological
and emotional aspects of
this ingrained cultural habit.
Bridging the gap between self and
other goes well beyond making physical
contact, into territory both tangible
and intangible. In general, experience
enhances theory, so as an adjunct to
learning “Alexander touch,” I introduced
the Japanese trainees to the
culture of Contact Improvisation.
After working intensively for four
evenings during the week, our Saturday
class was a time for assimilating
and for looking into related work such
as developmental movement, Barten-
ieff Fundamentals and Contact Improvisation.
Early classes included leading
and following exercises and partnering
with finger to finger contact.
These Contact experiences greatly
inform Alexander teaching skills such
as timing and flexibility. More importantly,
the students lost their apprehension
about initiating touch with a
partner. The Contact work influenced
not only the quality of touch but gave
the students more confidence and ease
in the Alexander partner work.
As the first year of the training
course progressed, the Saturday classes
took on a unique character. Some
of the discipline of the weekday classes
fell away, and students felt free to
roll on the tatami floor or, if need be,
to drift into sleep for a few moments.
(The general level of stress and exhaustion
in Japan goes beyond anything
I’ve witnessed in the States, but
sheer will drives the Japanese beyond
the limits of comfort. I celebrate
when my students allow themselves to
collapse!) Feeling as if any movement
structure put forth would be attempted
in good faith, I introduced weight
sharing and weight bearing. Granted,
Alexander teachers do not make full
body contact or do any heavy lifting,
but to myself I justified teaching these
activities as means of learning spatial
awareness and kinesthetic sensitivity.
Certainly I did not need to justify
my methods to the students because
they were too busy having fun. Witnessing
Yuzuru, aged 61, steamrolling
across his partner’s back with sheer
delight quickly erased any doubts as to
the value of this work. Part of what
an Alexander teacher does is put the
students at ease so that constructive
thinking and learning can take place.
If the teacher is uncomfortable with
his or her own movement, that discomfort
will be conveyed to the student.
Spatial awareness is also necessary
so that the teacher can recognize
and respect the student’s personal
boundaries. Establishing a comfortable
distance in which to work demands
understanding of nonverbal
cues and the ability to move closer or
farther away without losing “the direction”
in one’s hands. Such subtle,
interpersonal skills can only be learned
experientially.
As unorthodox as it may seem,
including a bit of Contact Improvisation
in Alexander teacher training cuts
through a lot of awkward fumbling.
Sensing yourself as well as your partner
in a Contact duet can translate to
knowing where you are in relation to
your student in an Alexander lesson.
Kinesthetic “listening” cultivated
through following a point of contact
applies directly to what Alexander
teachers call “giving direction” through
touch.
In Japan, outside of the training
course, I attend as many performances
of both traditional and contemporary
dance and theater as possible. From
what I’ve seen of “modem dance” in
Japan, physical contact is relatively
rare. One company, called Monochrome
Circus, includes some leaning
and falling in pairs, and several Butoh
groups incorporate touching, but none
of this partnering could be called Contact
Improvisation. There might be
some Contact in Tokyo, but as far as I
know, the trainees in the Kyoto Alexander
Program are the first generation
of Japanese Contacters!

---------------------

ITHACA blurring the genre of critical practice
by Richard Bull


“Blurring Genresa conference on “alternative forms of critical practice,” was held
at the University of Alberta, Canada, in April, 1989. Choreographer Richard Bull was a
panelist, but instead of using the panel’s podium, he rose from his seat, joined by his
associate, Cynthia Novack, and began to move as he spoke. This article, while it does not
transcribe the text of the event, is based on it, further blurring the genre by moving it to
the printed page. [R.B.]
“Was she ready to begin when he leaned toward her?” he asked as he leaned
toward her. They were in the front row of the conference room, and he spoke quietly;
only those very near her (in the room) overheard him.
“She was ready to begin,” she answered quietly, “and rose slowly from her seat,
moving past the podium.” She rose, slowly, quietly, and walked toward the podium.
Some members of the audience noticed the two of them (watching, listening). Perhaps a
panelist’s presentation was getting organized? This was, perhaps, a program event?
As she rose from her chair and moved (forward, toward her right) she looked at
him over her left shoulder, gesturing toward him. “As she moved away from him, what
were his thoughts?” she said.
He moved with her, opposite her in the open space. “He was surprised...and
pleased...to see how she had dressed for the meeting,” he said, leaving it to the reader
to imagine her costume and invent her body. “He thought they were a duet of panelists.
They were, by definition, of the genre panelist. He was staring at her,” he said, staring
at her.
He began turning a tight circle of tiny steps around himself, looking anxiously at
her. He stopped. “What was the meaning of the term blurring genres to her?” he
asked, half expecting the term to be defined later (elsewhere) in the published
proceedings.
There was a moment of silence, of stillness, of nothing happening, of audience
anticipation. She was waiting for an answer to occur, he was waiting for her to answer.
Suddenly he resumed his circling in place (sauntering), and she joined him, turning tight
circles about herself (ambling), in phase with him—the two of them facing the front of
the room together, then the side, the back, the other side, the front, and so on, rounding
the comers in perfect synchrony. Together they formed a (slowly pirouetting) pair of
peripatetic panelists.
She paused. He stopped turning. She began walking slowly toward the front of
the room. He headed toward the back comer, waiting for her to answer, but she was
absorbed in looking up at the ceiling of the room as she moved forward, a deceptively
difficult mind-body coordination, given her unfamiliarity. Then, abruptly, she broadened
her stride, taking giant steps across the front of the room. These last two descriptive,
pedestrian paragraphs, without question or answer, were for the reader, who smiled,
glanced over them again, and then continued (sitting, reading).
“To blur the genre, one must see it for what it is not” (she took a deep breath),
“which means seeing it clearly and distinctly” (a series of small returning steps and a
quick turn). “At the moment, we are both panelists and performers” (a sudden fall to
the floor), “creating a new genre” (stretch out on the floor, relax, close the eyes, seem to
doze off).
He watched, listening carefully, then struck out into the space. He, too, took big
steps, small steps, a quick turn, and then (surprise) a prodigious feet-first leap against
the wall, flipping himself over and (thud) landing on his hands near the table of offset
announcements and excerpted articles.
She opened her eyes, dimmed by the darkness. Except for that movement
(eyelids) she was quite still. She knew she had missed (seeing) something, but she had
(listening) heard it, every step of it, and knew enough to wait for his next move. He
took it, giving it to her.
“What was the significance” (drop out of the handstand) “of the lean and
muscular bibliography” (come into a heavy squatting crouch, arms dangling absently,
knuckles grazing the floor), “taken in the context of the conference itself?” (stand up,
almost casually, move off to the side). He glared at her, rocking back and forth, toe to
heel to toe again, and again to heel, continuing the (choreographic) phrase as she
responded to him.
“The bibliography contained only two books, both of them by James Joyce.” She
clarified, crossing the room to stand close to him, sending the reader to first one1, then
another2 footnote at the bottom of the page. A moment later she recrossed the room to
stand opposite him (rock and roll).
“His crouching, his sudden standing, his moving off to one side, his rocking and
rolling: these movements were anticipated in that bibliography.” Her eyes narrowed; the
room blurred. As if on cue, the audience (sitting, watching, listening, not moving at all)
stirred restlessly.
They stood together, not moving; listening, watching (without moving). They
said nothing (looking, thinking, blurring; they could feel someone reading them). Then,
spontaneously, without planning it, they sat down together, casually, easily, without
footnotes, without chairs (on the floor together, sitting).
“Had she noticed,” he said, “the taking off of the shoes and socks?” As he
spoke, he acted (taking them off), and so did she, except for the speaking, which he did
without her (not speaking).
“Two, one from each—that is, one person, one foot, one shoe, one bare
foot—off! Or, otherwise described, two taken together; four feet, two bare, two shod,
one on each, a total of eight, if shoe and sock are not taken as one but as two, one each
for each foot.” He thought of the shoes and socks as sucking stones, and resolved to
reread the pebble passage before expanding the bibliography.3
She stuffed a sock into her shoe and tossed it to the side of the room. “Of
course,” she added as she rose to one (bare) foot, “the absence of the same makes
sixteen, as the thoughtful reader will surely see.” He had finished (talking and taking
off one shoe and one sock) and this had been her answer. He stood up in his shoe,
beside her. “Of course?” he asked (rhetorically standing).
And then, quietly, and very slowly (emphasized and quietly italicized for the
reader), they backed away from the audience. Nothing was said, except to say that they
backed further away; still nothing was said, and a hush upon everything in the room:
panelists, performers, audience, bystanders, onlookers, passers-by. But not the room
itself, a subdued but noisy genre whose walls—electrical, mechanical, providential—
were beyond the control of the conference (backing up slowly, quietly).
Reaching the back of the room (simultaneously, side by side) they reversed
direction and began to walk forward slowly, alternating questions, responses, and feet in
a geometry of studied, allusive indifference.
“What was the feel of the floor beneath her feet?” he asked (step, steptogether;
step, steptogether: a processional).
“First warm,” she said, “then cool; dry and caky, then wet; first like a corrugated
cardboard bookcover, then very much like the shallow shore of a small island (more of
the stylized, processional progress, an approach to the chairs in the front row).” She
paused pomographically, stretching her sensuous panelist’s body voluptuously (to shock
the reader and blur the genre once again) then asked: “And the feel of his floor?”
“He felt its roundness (the planet); he felt it firm (the building containing the
room); he sensed it both pushing and pulling at him (the force called gravity).” He felt
guided by all these things. And, yet, he hesitated, hovering over his seat, looking back
at her. “And yet—why did he hesitate, hovering over his seat, looking back at her?”
“For the same reason that she hesitated,” she reassured him. ‘They knew that
they were being watched. They were of the same genre. They stood in evidence.” She
hesitated a moment, stepping forward (standing beside him). “Did he, too, sense that
their presence as performance panelists was blurring, fading, perhaps even ending?” she
asked.
This last question went unanswered as they sat down. They were preoccupied
(sitting down), acknowledging the polite applause (heads nodding). There was a
scheduled break in the proceedings, and the room began to reverberate with personal,
private proceedings, most of them alliterative (cups of coffee, conversations, colloquies,
conquests, choreographies), foreshadowing further footnotes, alternative forms.


----------------

Random letter

Dear Eds, I was recently asked to give a talk
on a panel at the Arts NW booking conference
in Boise, Idaho. When I sat
down to write it (it was to be about
“Arts and the Community’’), what came
out was a response to what’s happening
now—politically.
This is not about alternative dance
or alternative art. It’s just about ART
in our society and why it is so very
important—now more than ever. We
are being made to feel unnecessary and
self-indulgent, so this is to help tell
ourselves and others how noble our
profession is.
“Art and Society”
January 1995
With the recent sudden change in
the political climate in this country, I
personally have had to once again immerse
myself in the deep reasons for
being involved in the arts, in order to
have the strength and courage to continue
in what I believe to be one of the
noble pursuits of humankind. There is
in the current political climate an increasingly
fashionable atmosphere of
conformity to preset slogans, a fear of
diversity and creativity, and perhaps
most disturbing—an overriding materialism
that is so pervasive we often cease
to even notice it.
NOW more than ever is a time when
art and artists are important for our
culture and for our souls. Just when we
might feel like dinosaurs—some obsolete
species left over from the sixties—
we need to recognize that we are more
important than ever, and to renew our
energies. Art at its best can lift us
above our pettinesses and allow us to
breathe the air of a state of awareness in
which our minds, hearts, bodies and
spirits can be integrated; and our deeper
connections with each other, with all
living things, and with our planet, can
be felt.
Art means involvement in creative
process—an integration of rational intelligence
and intuition—with a deep reverence
for TRUTH, and the timeless
value that integration of beauty and
truth can bring us. Whether it is a
dance, a play, a painting, a poem or
music, it is an experience of the creative
energy that is within us all. By experiencing
this ourselves, and by helping
communicate this to others, we allow
everyone involved to get in touch with
their creative energy—whether it involves
creating a work of art, marketing
art, raising a child, running a business,
healing illness, being a congressional
representative—anything.
In the absence of pervasive spiritual
involvements in our society, art is the
closest thing we have to help us go
deeper into ourselves—beyond our egos
and our material concerns. I think we
all know how very important this is.
This is not just a matter of relaxation
and entertainment—although it can be
relaxing and entertaining. Art appeals
to the best that is within every human
being—and helps that bit of best grow
bigger.
I have been an artist for twenty
years and have performed and taught all
over the world. It is because of these
awarenesses that I continue in a
field—dance—in which there is little
possibility of living much beyond poverty
level even when wildly successful.
If the performances I help create give
some audience members energy and
excitement about their own creativity
and the possibilities in their own lives,
then I feel I am doing something very
important.
If artists don’t underestimate the
intelligence of the audience—but always
assume that everyone out there is
awake, intelligent, open-minded, creative,
excited about life and aware of its
depth and mystery—and if the artwork
is open enough in its possibilities for
interpretation, each perceiver can individually
respond, free-associate or be
otherwise stimulated, while simultaneously
experiencing some common
thrust of meaning with the rest of the
audience. If the artwork does not blast
the audience with a theme that is impossible
to misunderstand, but gives
them something with a bit of the multifacetedness
and elusiveness of real life,
then the experience will sharpen the
creative and perceptual powers of the
viewer. We will be encouraging
thoughtfulness, sensitivity, and a deep
awareness of one’s own intuitions,
rather than helping create a nation of
couch potatoes whose most intense
emotions lean toward anger and frustration,
and who are ready to follow anyone
who feeds them a handy slogan.
On the one hand, we have the possibility
of a society of enlightened individuals
with a deep feeling of connection
and harmony, and a respect for
diversity. On the other hand, we have
the possibility of fascism. It is always
lurking there.
If politicians are going to have any
chance of changing the world by appealing
to the best in people, we need
to develop a way of life in which people
are encouraged to develop the best
in themselves. This has been the role
of art for centuries. This means judging
how we are doing not by how much
food is on our own individual plate and
money in our individual pocket, but by
how enlightened we are as individuals
and how connected we are to each other
and to the creative forces in our universe.

by Stephanie Skura
