
Contact Quarterly's Contact Improvisation Sourcebook


PREFACE
'7he whole point of Newsletter is staying in contact
... if a ball can be got rolling and letters from various
sources added in, we may get a synergistic handle on
issues. Addressing issues from Newsletter to Newsletter
will contribute dimensions in Newsletter. I feel pithy pros
and cons promote our growth and make our newsletter a
better reflection of our multiple stands and moves."
Steve Paxton, CQ Newsletter, Vol 2 #1, Fall 1976
It is Contact Improvisation's 25th anniversary this year, an occasion to celebrate and
reflect on Contact Improvisation as a dance form and its growth from a week of performances at
the John Weber Gallery in NYC in June of 1972 initiated by Steve Paxton with a group of young
dancers, to a movement form practiced by thousands of people all over the world. It has been a
remarkable evolution, much of it chronicled in the pages of Contact Quarterly.
In 1975, a few years into the work, we began hearing of physical injuries resulting from
people doing Contact from having seen it in performance, without an introduction to the subtle ·
sensing work that underlies the more vigorous physical activity. How to keep the work safe? we
wondered. Steve, and the small group continuing to practice and show the work with him, con-
sidered trademarking the name and certifying or authorizing teachers. Preliminary papers were
drawn up but were never signed. The prospect of policing Contact was not appealing. More
interesting was the idea of creating a vehicle for communication, a newsletter, in which to report
activity and current thinking within the work, in this way keeping the work open, and inviting
ourselves and others further into the dialogue.
This seems to have been a crucial decision, one leading to the considerable expansion of
the work and its enrichment by many individuals over the years.
For the First European Contact Teachers Conference, in Holland in 1985, Margot Rijven,
Karen Nelson, and I manufactured a quick, xeroxed compendium of writings on Contact Improv-
isation from all the issues of Contact Quarterly dance journal that we could get our hands on in
Amsterdam, including several of the early issues. It was a handy, fascinating volume which we
reprinted twice for the Contact Teachers Conferences at the Breitenbush Hot Springs Contact Jams
in Oregon in 1986 and 1987. We sold the leftover copies through CQ and that was the end of it.
In honor of Contact's silver jubilee, and because many of our early issues are now out of
print, CQ has produced this new and updated, limited edition CI Sourcebook. In it you'll find
the majority of writings on Contact Improvisation that have appeared in CQ from its inception
as Contact Newsletter in 1975 through Volume 17, 1992. CQ issues from 1993 to the present,
containing increasing amounts of Contact dialogue, are available through CQ as back issues.
The making of the CQ/CI Sourcebook was a big job, bigger than any of us expected.
Each page has been carefully prepared by Harriett Jastremsky and Mette Gustavsen, photocopied
directly from the original magazine pages with minor alterations, adding volume and year
citations at the bottom of each page to orient you. They handled all aspects of the increasingly
complex production with grace, curiosity, creativity and good humor.
Some explanation about the recurring section headings in the book: "Definitions" were a
regular feature in the first years of CQ. We included a different definition of Contact in every issue
along with a photo, in this way hoping to record the variety of styles used for presenting/describ-
ing this new movement form as it developed; many are included here. As CQ grew, several
"departments" were created in the magazine to support the increasing exchange amongst Contact
practitioners. "Round Up: CI in perspective" ran from 1976 to 1981 and included a variety of
reviews and views of the work. In 1984 we instituted "Still Moving: Contact shoptalk and
dialogue," to encourage in-depth discussions of the working process that went beyond the newsy
CQ!CI Sourcebook ix
reports in the Contact Newsletter section of the magazine. This column has continued to grow
in substance and in size over the years.
The CQ/C/ Sourcebook contains lively and personal evidence of the growth of Contact
Improvisation as a duet movement form, the community that grew up around it, and the concur-
rent evolution of the magazine. Evidence of people taking initiative to make events happen and
attempting, in many forms, to articulate their findings. Reading through these years of CQ writ-
ings is like going on an archeological dig, into the heart and mind of the work as it lives in the
people who do it. It is satisfying to have these pages together in a single volume. The spirit of
discovery and exchange is strong; the reflection, dimensional.
We hope you find the Sourcebook a useful and enjoyable addition to your library. Your
responses, as well as your own Contact writings, are always welcome at CQ's mailbox. Please
don't hesitate to be in touch.
Nancy Stark Smith
Coeditor, CQ
June 1997
x CQ/CI Sourcebook
a vehicle for moving ideas
Interview with Steve Paxton
by June Johnston
June Johnston: Steve, could you tell me what hap-
pened in the instant of innovation when you sudden-
ly discovered you had something?
Steve Paxton: (laughs) No, I couldn't. That in-
stant began for me probably in 1961 and is still
continuing. It's simply part of the process of ex-
ploration that dance work has been for me. There
was not an instant. There were many, many years
of classes, compiling of material from different
movement forms. There was a time when several
of us in v ermont who were working on this form
decided to name it. I was actively looking for a
name for an '.it' that we· obviously were all involved
with.
June: Could you say what that 'it' was?
Steve: Well, Contact Improvisation was chosen
as a name because it expresses it well. It's a
strange name, I think, but it it hasn't seemed to
have hampered it at all because it is accurate.
It is definitely a physical art and you deal with
the other person physically but there's also all
the other aspects of person that are contacting
each other.
Volume 4 1979 CQICI Sourcebook 1
A SHORT HISTORY
During a Grand Union residency at
Oberlin College in January 1972, Steve
Paxton made a work for 11 men in which
they threw, caught, flung, collided and fell
among one another continuously for l 0
minutes. Then they stood for a few min-
utes. The dance was called 'Magnesium'.
That spring, while teaching at Benning-
ton College, Steve met with two students-
Leon Felder and Nita Little-who had
been stimulated by a similar curiosity with
the physical forces that effect motion, ex-
perimenting with lifting, falling and ex-
changing weight with mutual support. In
June 1972, with funding from Change,
Inc., Steve gathered about 15 "of the best
athletes that I had run into in the course
of a year or two of teaching," both men
and women, to explore the principles and
potential of communication first evident
in 'Magnesium'. The first week was spent
in rehearsal. The 2nd week was a public
showing of the working process, 5 hours
daily, at the Weber Gallery in NYC. This
event was called Contact Improvisation.
Among the participants were Laura Chap-
men, Steve Christiansen (video), Barbara
Dilley, Leon Felder, Mary Fulkerson,
Danny Lepkoff, Nita Little, Alice Luster-
man, Curt Siddall, Nancy Stark Smith,
Nancy Topf and David Woodberry.
Inspired by this event, the work contin-
ued. A tour in early 1973 brought Steve
Paxton, Curt Siddall, Nancy Stark Smith,
Nita Little and Karen Radler to the West
Coast, performing and leading workshops
in Contact Improvisation under the name,
'You Come, We'll Show You What We
Do'. The ambience of the work in per-
formance continued to be informal: no
music, special lighting or costume, audi-
ences in the round, duets and trios inter-
spersed with solo dancing. In June 1973,
Steve brought a group to Europe for the
first time to perform Contact at L' Attico
Gallery in Rome.
By 1974, Nita, Curt and Nancy were in
the San Francisco Bay Area teaching the
form to others, creating more dance-mates
and developing a context for the work's
expansion. Joined by Steve Paxton, in
1975 they formed ReUnion, the first
formal Contact Improvisation company,
meeting once a year to tour the West
Coast with performances and classes. The
continuing dialogue concerning Contact's
development soon included hundreds of
other individuals and groups. The Contact
Newsletter (now Contact Quarterly) was
initiated by ReUnion in 1975, edited and
produced by Nancy Stark Smith, to foster
communication among the geographically
dispersed teachers, performers and practi-
tioners of Contact. Inspired by the work,
the work continues. ~
Lisa Nelson & Nancy Stark Smith
2 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Susan Milani and Alan Gardner
Volume 5 1979-80
DANNY LEPKOFF:
Volume 1
1975-76
NOTES AFTER TEACHING SECOND CLASS IN MISSOULA MONT ANA
After teaching I walked home and sat and talked
with Janet - I realized today that I am not
interested in the form of Contact Improvisa-
tion but in the spirit the form contains - this
spirit is a real thing and with out the spirit
Contact turns into something like Judo - the
spirit is a living work process that is not nec-
essarily confined to Contact Improvisation but
is a way of playing of attaining the freedom
to play with yourself and others with a tree
or a pole. I want to drum up this spirit. In
teaching Contact I feel two things:
1. That I know and understand the form
but in order to convey the spirit through
the form I must find a something to
teach which is not outside to myself but
is me
2. I've come here to Missoula and I feel
that the form "Contact" is pretty much
com man knowledge or thought to be by
.._,,
alot of people and there are lots of ex-
pectations to what it is - "Get out the
mats - do a round robin"
So I think in order to teach the spirit of con-
tact I cannot teach Contact.
I want to create a situation in which free play
- FREE PLAY - can happen -
Where a certain concentration is going - with
a certain practice - and nothing happens until something is happening
I want to create a situation where
1 nothing happens (an exhausted state)
AND
2 (when you dont know whats gonna happen is happening)
SO TEACH A CLASS IN WHICH YOU REACH A STATE WHERE NOTHING IS HAPPENING BUT POS-
SIBILITIES ARE OPEN - THATS ALL YOU HAVE TO DO ------SURPRISES - -VOICE WORK ---
SHOUT A WORD TO EACH OTHER---- GO OUT AND TAKE A WALK AROUND THE ROOM-------
Volume 1 1975-76 CQICI Sourcebook 3
DARTINGTON MARCH:
Images. Spent time with Mary Fulkerson, teaching and taking classes. Several of our number
[contacters] have studied with Mary, and she has spent time in Contact, though she prefers
her own work as a basis from which to teach. However, the continuing juxtaposition of her
Anatomical Release work and Contact has provoked a headful of thought; her students in Eng-
land and those from Rochester, N.Y. take to Contact with remarkable ease compared to other
groups in the U.S.
This ease of assimilation is of interest. While the students are lying down, crawling, walking or
running, Mary Fulkerson speaks ritually, encouraging greater sensitivity to alignment and efficient
patterns in the body. The manner of presentation tends to by-pass the though~ of the listener.
The listener is preoccupied with moving or relaxing at the time, and the ritualization has a lulling
effect, soothing in tone and timing. The images she provides are simplified anatomical 'cartoons'
of functioning anatomy as opposed to intellectual or visual anatomy. These images describe .sen-
sations - their location in the body and possible directions in which they might move.
The students then assimilate material directly from their own sensations, culled from releasing
unnecessary tension, work, strain.
Mary Fulkerson finds a rare balance of authority and humility which gives fundamental weight
to her voice without usurping the motivation of the student and avoiding their rebellion or
fascination. Nor does her voice question the integrity of the sensations unique to each student.
Their confidence in the process gathers momentum with the growth of awareness of the functional
anatomy, and soon, non-anatomical images can be simply physicalized. Earlier in the process
however, before these channels become clear, an illogical image would more likely provoke bewild-
erment, scorn, or intellectual interest, than movement.
The parallel is with the Contact 'stand': The mind of the listener is encouraged to become a
receiving instrument. Fulkerson's images further provide guidance to sensations which improve
function. The stand in Contact isused to remove the habitual masking of the forces-that-be by
relaxing the listener into states of mind where time, gravity, mass and inertia are apparent, where
balance is seen as subtle movement, and social expectations in partnering can be dropped; it is
possible to talk directly to the body~ and for the listener to listen directly with the body. Each
person can hone and direct real physical sensations into their own most direct & efficient dance.
As Mary Fulkerson is currently presenting her work at Dartingtim College (Devon, England) it
is used as a first step providing the student with a map into private anatomical sensations and
improvements. Great care has been given to the anatomical propriety of the images, because
in this work, the idea each person's mind holds of their body is seen as crucial to the awareness
each develops.
Beyond Mary Fulkerson's work there is a question for the student at Dartington. What to do
with the vocabulary they have sensed and the improvements they find in their use of the body?
Many possibilities exist, and one path, that of Contact, seems quite compatible; moving from
the interior of one's functioning anatomy, to functioning with another. I hope in the coming
years more of us have an opportunity to sample this connection.
STEVE PAXTON
4 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 1 1975-76
A MATTER OF DELICACY:
In response to Daniel Lepkoff's letter last issue (Number Four/Spring 76), a question:
How removed from the defined Contact classes and concepts should one be and continue to call
the material Contact Improvisation? There are two sectors this question affects: the contactor5,
and the public; that is, students, prospective students, or views of contact - the public image as
it were, by which to some degree Contact Improvisation is defined.
Contact is not a finished thing. Changes in its methodology and its result are expected.
However, the definition it has achieved has been a consistent one, giving a useful continuity to those
new performers who wish to communicate, especially on paper, what they are doing in concerts
and classes. For the students of Contact (of whom there have been many hundreds at this writing)
it seems only fair to either follow procedures designed to aid them in dancing with community of
contactors at large, or to indicate in titles and descriptions of classes (as Mangrove has done) the
bridge between Contact Improvisation and new attitudes stemming from Contact, that are actually
quite different in practice. The delicacy comes here: How wide is the definition of Contact to be,
and is Contact well used by this extrapolation? An extreme position relative to the established core
of Contact Improvisation should probably be given another name or reserved for advanced contactors
to whom the references would be clear.
This is a century of extrapolation. It is not coincidental that industrial revolution, the
modern arts, the increased pace of communication and travel have all occurred this past 100 years.
Change of attitude, environment, ideas, reality, happen far more easily now and the problem is
this, change is cheap. Definition has become difficult to establish or to maintain.
The artist has a duty/right to manipulate the techniques which contribute to their art.
There are however, responsibilities to these techniques to keep them clear of confusion. For those
dancers already familiar with Contact techniques, it may be that outside the Contact framework more
improvisational adventure may be found. Should it, however, be called Contact? The dilution or the
refinement of that central experience depends on the consideration_ we give its presentation.
STEVE PAXTON
**********************************************************************************
Volume 1 1975-76 CQ/CI Sourcebook 5
Nijinsky, rockets, platform shoes, Notre Dame, top-hats, the World Trade towers, every spire, every
pedestal, the pre-occupation of Western dance with leaps, the whole notion of Heaven.
Amidst mania for escape, (when did it begin?) from Earth's hold on us, Contact Improvisation springs
up and spreads love of the fall. Instead of the rebellion of blast-offs, there is a surrender of surfaces.
The lust for the "impossible," a moon-landing, a test-tube child, we replace with attention to the actual.
"Find out what the body does; not what you can make it do." The crusade to capture a There is aban-
doned, leaving us here, to fall, and roll and fly.
Christie Svane
<!)
s
;::l
0
>
s
0
J::
Sean Curran and Amy Pivar in their duet "Buffaloes Roam"
6 CQ!CI Sourcebook
Volume 2 1976-77
Volume 2
1976-77
EDITOR LETTER
Nancy Stark Smith
Welcome. Yes; you're in the right place. The Contact Newsletter has moved on to become the
Contact Quarterly - a publication put out voluntarily by Free Association four times a year (seasonally).
Free Association isn't an official name for those of us behind the Quarterly, but a term that catches the
spirit of our collaboration. Our personnel shifts with each issue depending on (1) which coast is hosting the
production, and (2) the availability and interest of local contacters for work on the production.
Our common center is a working and experiential knowledge of Contact Improvisation. So far,
everyone who has 'freely associated' on any of the Newsletter/Quarterly publications has had some exper-
ience with this new, now almost five-year-old, dance-movement-meditation-art-sport-event-piece. On that
basic ground we 'stand', and from that stand we swing out - into our overlapping worlds to collect material
and enthusiasm to channel back through the center and out as far as it travels. Arriving safely and with news.
Contact is interface. And though there are only certain faces you've seen before, there are many
more where they came from. Parallel transparencies. Two people inventing electricity within days of each
other on opposite sides of the globe. Coincidence? Yes, Co-Incidence. And in a likewise but less dramatic
manner, we find more of each other every day.
Contact Improvisation has the unique quality of being believed - whether admired, respected,
scorned, berated, inflated or ignored. Yes real time. Yes real bodies. Yes real people. This particular
credibility allows Contact Improvisation and those involved in it, to run tangent to many worlds - relating
deeply in to those worlds without either becoming distracted or dilute. In fact, the communication which we
continue to develop among ourselves and articulate in our dancing serves us well outside our immediate
numbers. It is what creates our access to the unfamiliar faces, the rapidly surfacing and the as-yet unsurfaced
numbers of people who are working with the material of their lives in just such a direct manner as we attempt
in our teaching, performing and writing of Contact Improvisation.
We 'stand' together at the ring of a watering hole; our weight brings the water up, our bodies,
the weight down.
So, that's where we come from. And here is where we are.
Volume 2 1976-77 CQ/CI Sourcebook 7
EDITOR'S REPORT I High Moon - 11th Hour Reflections
Nancy Stark Smith
The image I had for the last issue (Winter 1976) was the water hole. The
place where we collect to drink. A circle where everyone who comes fits
in. All those cows bent to the water, the lines of their backs, helped me
re-invent the wheel. At the watering hole we stood in order to bring our
weight down; our weight brought the water up. We came full circle.
This time we started again with nothing. New moon. We collected ourselves.
As the last light left, we arranged ourselves in a blind configuration; (blackout
on stage, the lights come up and the performers arc all in place). We started.
Then the crescent moon - we seemed to use the light as it grew, filling in the
implied circle. Journal entry, March 24: " ... Musing new directions, transition
at its most spread out point, as entropy of possibilities peaks." The moon, a new
image to fill, and we, in as much detail as possible, articulate the filling.
Learning the ropes means knowing how far they can take you; how much weight
they can hold. One day, the arc of the rope's swing is predictable and suddenly
short. There is another side; the side just outside your reach. But is your reach
the rope's, or, if you can find a vehicle with a larger range should you ride it. "Lim-
its are what any of us are inside of," Charles Olson said in a talk that was recorded.
In ReUnion's Contact classes we often talk during the warm up. Not necessarily to
suggest specific activities, exercises or structures, but to create an environment, to
supply images that may call out a particular awareness. We talk to the body as
it experiences sensation. We say, "You know that place when you stretch, the
place where the muscle has eased out to its limit, that place on the edge of
stress, on the edge of pain." We say, "Work there, spend some time there,
on this side of the edge." "The edge is home," Lee Breuer said during a
radio interview in Washington, D.C. in 1975. But it seems the edge is
moveable - that by sensing the limit, respecting it, you encourage it
to open. A push comes to a shove. But if you go only as far as you
are welcome, you are invited back.
What has this got to do with the Contact Quarterly. Not sure,
only that I sat down to present the image I was having for
this process. How we stand. How we stand still, and
keep moving.
Palm Sunday. Full Moon. Lunar Eclipse.
NANCY'S FIST & WRIST
LISA'S ErnOW
8 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume2 1976-77
CONTACT IMPROVISATION - A STATEMENT OF APPRECIATION
Danny Lcpkoff
Contact Improvisation is a way for people to come together and interact on a purely physical
level. Fostering a healthy interaction is the important concern.
In coming to a dance one must be ready to engage in a constant effort to focus on the physical
sensations of weighted movement, balance and stillness. It is not the issue to identify through any
conscious thought process what the sensations are; you need not know "what physical sensations
you are experiencing," you must know how to focus with constant effort. It is. the strength and purity
of this effort which will foster a healthy interaction in dancing with another.
The simplicity of the form Contact Improvisation is a gift. Its value is that it Is A Way for you and
I to dance together. To befriend the forces of gravity and momentum is to dance with a sense of humor
and constant humility, is to discover one's being self, is to discover true communion.
The essence of this dancing is the concentration and focus one brings as a dancer, it is only through
this constant effort that our dancing will continue to be.
Four laws of ecology: "(1) everything is connected to everything else;
(2) everything must go somewhere;
(3) nature knows best; and
(4) there is no such thing as a free lunch."
Barry Commoner in The Closing Circle,
A. Knopf, New York, 1971, p. 18.
'-·
I.
.
·--1~
Volume 2 1976-77 ',, ....... lk'
-4.~
, '
, '
, ' SP
CQICI Sourcebook 9
A LOOK BACK AND A LOOK FORWARD
Danny Lepkoff
The work I have done in Contact Improvisation has, needless to say, had a powerful eff~ct in my
life. In the late spring of 1972 Steve told me of a piece he wanted to do in N.Y.C., and I went down
there to rehearse and perform a dance called Contact Improvisation. The work that was done for that
performance and subsequent gatherings for intense periods of dancing was larger and affected more
levels of my being than I was aware of at the time. Most forceably I was struck by the simple yet over-
whelming experience of communion with another person achieved through the dancing, and the freedom
as well as discipline found within that communi~n. I remember feeling literally transported to another
world when dancing, a world in which I was able to become a stronger self than I lived with day to day.
I don't think, in that first performance, anyone fully realized the power of the forces brought into play
among us. Many injuries, pulled, sore, and knotted muscles were the physical result of irresponsibility
in the face of those forces. I became impressed with a sense of responsibility to myself and those I was
dancing with to create a healthy interaction.
The work done during that concert became not something I could forget. The realm of Contact
Improvisation I realized was not "dance" but living, the forces at play between two people dancing are
those forces which exist day to day, the strong self I had experienced was nothing but myself. I was left
with the ever present challenge to realize my strong self in day to day living as well as the responsibility
of achieving a healthy and true communion with those people I meet day to day. I suppose this task
is universal for all living beings, however I have received a lot of strength and focused energy specifically
from the work I have done with Contact Improvisation.
I realize now that in order to continue this work I must be involved in the process of transmission.
lt'seems that with understanding and experience of the forces at play in Contact Improvisation, receiving
becomes transmitting, student becomes teacher, dancing becomes giving. It seems very natural, and I
do not hesitate to think that any one who has had enough experience with Contact will feel this shift of
role. It is no wonder there are now many teachers of Contact Improvisation.
The dancing is just beginning to expand on a social level, into our society. What will be the direction
of this expansion? Contact was created in the context of the dance art world. This is a good place, how-
ever the traditions of possession and ownership among artists are unhealthy for Contact Improvisation.
My dream is that Contact will grow to become a social function. Periodically people living in the same
area will gather for a day or week of dancing, for the sole function of communally reinforcing and acknow-
ledging the strong self inside each person in the face of those one lives with. Walking down the street and
greeting someone, buying groceries in a store, and all the daily interactions of people will be on a truer
more realistic footing, and a general climate of health may be achieved. This may seem far fetched but
I feel the beginning is at hand and in view of this direction it is obvious that we need to:
continue dancing and deepening our experience and familiarity with
the forces at play in Contact Improvisation
keep lines of communication open, i.e. this newsletter,
and cooperatively give and share the experiences and
information gleaned from dancing and teaching.
The class I tried to start in Bennington this summer did not work out. I am trying again this fall
to get some people together to dance. I think I will be picking apples this fall. The seasons are changing
here, color on the trees and colder nights and shorter days, new feelings emerge and don't fit comfortably
yet. Hope to see some of you again, maybe hit the west coast again this year.
Hello to All
10 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 2 1976-77
" ... and out of this I break and fall
what needs to be remembered will."
!·
. '
~. . "
''"~
. I'. ~ ,. Volume 2 1976-77
.•
-Curt Siddall
CQ/CI Sourcebook 11
Bodies in Contact , cont'd.
As a performer I have often been approached
. by members of the audience who are in wonder
about the phenomenon of Contact Improvisation.
A 170-pound man is dancing with a 120-pound
woman, rolling up and down her back and over
her shoulders, or being carried by her. Is it a skill
of gymnastic trickery? Not at all. Contact Im-
provisation is an expression of sensitivity in both
the physical and emotional realms. It demands,
above all, the ability to yield to the present
moment.
On a descriptive level, Contact Improvisation
. is a new movement form, improvisational in
nat.ure, involving two bodies in contact. Impulses,
weight and momentum are communicated through
a point of physical contact that continually rolls
across and around the bodies of the dancers.
Take two human bodies standing face to face.
Each one has a center of gravity within the body
somewhere in the vicinity of the navel, the
exact location depending on the proportions of
the individual. If they lean towards each other
and support each other simultaneously, they then
create a weight/mass system that ttas a center
of gravity in space somewhere between their
na~els. Like boleroes, fluid and eccentrically
weighted, the dancing bodies swing, bounce,
roll, swim and fly through and with the the
common center of gravity. As the participants
move, this center moves.
The original format for conducting contact
sessions is a "round robin." As the participants·
circle around the space a dynamic environment
is created; in response to this environment, the
dancers allow certain beginnings to occur. In·
tention and forcefulness have nothing to do with
all of this: The dance is ever changing, never
the same. A series of events takes place as un-
interrupted, pure transition from a beginning to
an end. Working with Contact Improvisation is
discovering how it feels to let this transition
take place organically. In each individual duet it
becomes apparent when an ending needs to
happen. The dancers are obligated by the form
to let these endings occur.
Like any discipline, Contact Improvisation
requires serious work to gain proficiency. As in
learning a new language, the movement and
concepts feel awkward at first, but with practice
one is able to find a personal range of expression.
Participation is not limited to "dancers," but
rather to anyone who wants to develop new skills
in movement.
The technique is most influenced by the disci-
plines of aikido, hatha and pranayama yoga and
gymnastics, all of which teach us tt1at energy is
conserved if the body knows how to flow along
12 CQ/CI Sourcebook
with what is happening instead of exerting energy
to determine the flow or to avert it. People, like
all creatures, are fearful of things unfamiliar.
Worki11g in this form one develops an apprecia-
tion of the unexpected within the realm of impro-
vising and, I have found, outside of it in every-
day life. In particular, one learns to feel com-
fortable in difficult or awkward body positions
and transitions. Certain physical skills are
developed and practiced: rolling, balancing,
posting, sliding, lifting, being lifted, falling,
relaxing, centering, using peripheral vision, using
dizziness, accepting the loss of horizon. These
specifics of physical discipline allow the body
to grow into this new type of expression safely
and smoothly.
For instance there is a basic concept of a
"post." The post is the means of support in a
weight/mass system at a given point in time.
The person acting as the post may change back
and forth ten times in twenty seconds or the post
may maintain that role for ten minutes. "Peripheral
vision," another basic concept, is a defocusing
of the eyes. Information from anywhere. within
the field cf view has equal importance. For most
people this useful field of view is almost 180
degrees.
An extreme example of this type of perceptlon
occurs in spinning: the eyes are open wide and
directed straight out, not attaching to objects
but rather noticing the patterns that define the
immediate environment and how it is changing.
When other people are moving in the space the
information that can be gained from this tool of
peripheral vision becomes extremely important,
with it the dancer can negotiate to safety and
flow. Another physical reality the dancer must
adjust for is "loss of horizon." In contact impro-
visation we can depend on only three things:
(1) one's self, (2) that the force of gravity works
continually in one direction, down, and (3) that
the floor supports our weight. It is a difficult task
to say goodbye to that level line that we are un-
consciously oriented to twenty-four hours of the
day, the horizon.
The hands are de-emphasized to about the
same utility as the foot; a means of support at
the end of the arm and a linear extension of the
movement in the arm. This was one of the first
lessons taught by Steve Paxton, the originator of
Contact Improvisation, back in those first work
sessions in New York: the hands never grab. This
type of action is a natural response for a beginner,
but is simply too dangerous and painful to one's
partner. Relaxed fingers and the use of every
square inch of the body as a contact surface or
"handle" is the sign of an experienced contact
improviser.
Volume 2 1976-77
Bodies in Contact , cont'd.
Another primary skill. though not necessarily
a phys!cal skill per se, is that of mental relaxation.
This involves letting go of the tendency to
c!cterrnine the movement. and the tc:iciency to
create security by keepinq on top of the events
through simultaneous intellectual explanations.
This relaxation can be achieved by focusing on
the point of contact, and on the material that
crops up. Every phrase is important, espedally
in the sense that it is the link to the next one.
All of the technical work is aimed at develop-
ing an in-depth understanding of a central concept
in Contact Improvisation: the "energy pathway."
Intellectually it is a somewhat vague concept
and is much more clearly understood when
experienced. However it may be thought of as
the path of least resistance in the moment to
moment reality of each dancer. If the dancer has
really found this "energy pathway," decisions
---
need not be made at all while partiqipating in a
duet.
Contact Improvisation can be described on
mnny levels, as it is something that takes place
on many levels. I think of language as a metaphor.
Conversation is a duet, it may be between a
number of people but the exchange of informa- ,
tion is on a one-to-one basis with a ba~k and
forth flow of ideas. Tile word vocabulary also
applies. The body is limited to a vocabulary of
expression just as in verbal communication. I
believe the sheer number of useful movement
building blocks is potentially as large as a
vocabulary such as the English language. Contact
Improvisation is a network of communication
frameworks for the dancer; the main emphasis
is on the here and now of each dance communi-
cation.
\
\
\
\
' ' ' ' '
....
-
---
~ ~ Volume 2 1976-77 56. [Axis of Movement] r
Different Surfaces created by Movement about the same Axis of Movemmt
CQ/CI Sourcebook 13
"The issue of how the scientific observer, or any other observer, separates
himself from the object being observed has been debated for 2500 years
without advancing a step, University of Georgia psychologist Ernst von
Glasersfeld told a rapt audience of several hundred scientists.
Anyone with a knowledge of aerodynamics can predict the path of a leaf
falling from a tree during a breeze. But mechanics can't explain the beha-
vior of a frog that might resist a wind strong enough to move an inanimate
object of its own weight, but will jump if a shadow falls on it.
That requires a tlieory of perception and information processing in the
frog."
Walter Barney. 'Dismantling the scientist's 'objectivity'' Sunday S.F.
Examiner & Chronicle. February 27, 1977. Reporting on the 143rd
annual convention of the American Association for the Advancement
of Science, Denver, Colorado.
SEEN FROM THE OUTSIDE
Ernst von Glasersfeld
In ordinary, every-day situations, to make contact
there have to be two. That seems a commonplace
and we simply take it for granted. Watching Con-
tact Improvisation, however, is a strange experience
at first. The making, keeping, and stretching of
contact, there, does not easily fit the accustomed
conceptual schema. It takes quite a while to discov-
er the reason: Its contacts involve not two but four.
In the world of our experience, what we call our "self"
is no more and no less than what we experience of our-
selves. In terms of our senses, our "self" is composed of
what we perceive of ourselves, visually and tactually for the
most part, plus what we internally sense about the states of
, our muscles and organs. This "self" is necessarily very different
from what we are in the experiential world of another person who,
visually and tactually, experiences us from a wholly different point of
view. In Contact Improvisation, therefore, there are two selves, each striving to maintain
contact with another person. Both are constantly the acting subject of their own actions, and at
the same time they are the object of the other's actions. And since the possibilities of making
and maintaining contact are nearly always many, the coordination of motion of the one
dancer that perceives the other and the other that perceives the one, is threatened
at every moment. There is a perpetual struggle to neutralize inherent discrepan-
cies and to preserve a reciprocally invariant relationship of contact. Seen from
the outside, this becomes a powerful and at times shattering allegory of the
precariousness of any harmony in human relations.
If this is not too idiosyncratic an interpretation, it must raise the question:
Will Contact Improvisation really remain a moment-to-moment improv-
isation or will it gradually develop regularities, fixed sequences, and
rules? Contact of two independent agents can be maintained only to
the extent to which one can foresee the motions of the other. (That
goes for ALL relationships, and that is why we always need some
rules and conventions). To IMPROVE in the art of Contact Improv-
isation (or in the art of relating to others) may mean to get better at
predicting the· other's moves AS WELL AS to get better at doing
what 'he orhe-r ex pee.rs.
14 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 2 1976-77
TEACHING CONTACT IMPROVISATION
Danny Lepkoff
In assuming the role of teacher you do not simply share your objective body of knowledge, you share
your basic attitude - towards the work
towards the world
You are in a position ofresponsibility:
Responsibility for trusting - in yourself
in your students
to give instruction and then to fallow
to teach and then to dance
You guide the student to the 'teacher in himself'
You share your knowledge of the dance by addressing yourself to that part of the student that already knows
If you hold on to your knowledge then you will feel insecure as a teacher
You must see your knowledge as limitless, this is what it is.
If /(
},'
...D. :r..._'
" I'm not contained between my hat and shoes."
Walt Whitman in Leaves of Grass.
Volume 2 1976-77 CQICI Sourcebook 15
"We are paying too little attention and response to the built-in
durability and sheer power of the human organism. Its greatest
tendency is toward stability and balance. It is a distortion ... to
picture the human being as a teetering, fallible contraption, al-
ways needing watching and patching and always on the verge of
flapping to pieces."
from The Lives of a Cell
by Dr. Lewis Th~~
CONTACT IMPROVISATION / A DEFINITION
Danny Lepkoff
Contact Improvisation is a duet movement form. Two people move together, in contact,
maintaining a spontaneous physical dialogue through the kinesthetic sensual signals of shared weight
and common or counterpoised momentum. The body, in order to open to the sensations of momentum,
weight, and balance, must learn to release excess muscular tension and abandon a certain amount of
willful volition to .the natural flow of movement at hand. Skills such as rolling, falling, and being upside
down are explored:, guiding the body to an awareness of its own natural movement possibilities. Simple
and direct duet exercises allow couples to explore and focus on specific relationships which come up in
free improvisation - i.e. supporting or taking someone's body weight, giving your own weight, jumping
on someone, rolling off of someone. Once certain simple exercises and sensations are introduced the
realm of organic body movement becomes very accessible to the body, and a great deal of one's essential
energy can be expressed. It becomes important to develop a state of alertness, the senses so poised, that
one may work in an energetic state of physical disorientation with safety, trusting one's basic survival
instincts.
All the work leads to free duet dancing: together with a partner one freely explores movement
possibilities, an experiment, a time to ·play, a time to dance togetherness, a time to be and speak through
your body.
Contact Improvisation deals fundamentally with organic body movement. Organic body movement
is motion manifest in activity directly dealing with the physical forces of the environment, gravity being
the major influence, ~ovemc:nt in which the body and senses are engaged in the effort of survival.· Sports
and games develop the body's organic movement possibilities to a peak. "Contact" has been called an
art-sport. Contact Improvisation speaks for the belief that the realm of organic body movement is limit-
less and rich in the possibilities for expression of one's self, one's being.
••••••••••a
16 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 2 1976-77
Volume 3
1977-78
" Language, once it comes alive, behaves
like an active, motile organism. Parts of it are
always being changed, by a ceaseless activity to
which all of us are committed; new words are
invented and inserted, old ones have their mean-
ing altered or abandoned. New ways of string-
ing words and sentences together come into
fashion and vanish again, but the underlying
structure simply grows, enriches itself, expands.
If language is at the core of our social
existence, holding us together, housing us in
meaning, it may also be safe to say that art and
music are functions of the same universal, gen-
etically determined mechanism. These are not
bad things to do together. If we are social
creatures because of this, and therefore like
ants, I for one (or should I say we for one?)
do not mind. "
Lewis Thomas
from The Lives of a Cell
EDITOR NOTE
At some point in the growth of Contact Improvisation
there was a call for definition, rules, a clear way to identify what
was {or wasn't) Contact Improvisation. ("There are no lines,
only edges." Ansel Adams) Only a few years after its inception,
Contact seemed to be spawning generations of contacters so
quickly as to be involved in some kind of 'telephone game'.
John tells Sally who shows Sue who passes it on to her brother
who tells his wife who shows their kids who bring it to school
the next day for recess. If John were walking by the schoolyard
at noon, would he recognize anything familiar going on in the
playground? For all the interest in defining Contact Improv-
isation, the answer to that quandary is in watching a contact duet
between two dancers who have just met. The definition is in
the doing.
Contact bases its language on the natural laws that govern
motion (gravity, momentum, inertia, etc.). With these laws as
our constitution, we have no need for legislation. The natural
world enforces its own laws - drop a book, consciously or not,
and it wil I fall. Clearly, Contact Improvisation is not the begin-
ning or the final stage in the opus that relates the body and its
movements to the earth and the other movers on it. The truths
we find in Contact, whether basic or elevated, are truths that
exist with or without Contact Improvisation as a means for re-
vealing them to us. Often in the enthusiasm of the work it is
possible to forget that bodies moving in contact are not new.
It is, however, the continued focus on the elements involved in
that contact, techniques for it, applications of it, that is specific
to Contact Improvisation.
Making a magazine (CQ) for the exchange of information
and viewpoint instead of making a congress, allowed the various
subtexts that existed to emerge and be shared. As a technique
for moving together, Contact resonates in the lives of the prac-
tioners. Those resonances are personal and varied, and though
they enrich the work, the basic practice seems unchanged.
After 6 years, Contact Improvisation continues, with
or without music, in twos, threes, in groups with a name or with-
out. Contacters have gathered in bodies, regional families, to
corroborate and continue. A context has developed similar to
social dancing wherein people can come together and 'jam'.
Tiirnugh Contact Quarterly a network exists, making known
places where Contact can be found. When a poker player comes
into a new town, he looks for the game.
Volume 3 1977-78
Nancy Stark Smith
Lisa Nelson
CQICI Sourcebook 17
THE POLITICS OF CONTACT
Byron Brown
On Saturday afternoon August 20, 1977, some thirty participants and teachers of FOCUS 8/77 gathered
to talk about the Politics of Contact. The issue was as much one of defining the question or concern as it was coming
up with an answer. The discussion began with a minimal definition of politics: awareness of and concern for the
power relationships in a given interaction or situation, particularly those relationships which are unacknowledged.
or assumed and unquestioned. From this beginning the discussion was wide-ranging, spirited and largely unstructured.
Going back over a ta pc-recording of the seminar a month later, I have selected out and arranged (without
regard to original sequence) representative and provocative comments to share with the larger contact community.
To my knowledge this discussion was the first attempt to look at our work from this perspective and clearly it is only
one small step, but an important one. In retrospect, I saw our talk centering around two issues.· The first was seldom
defined as a focus but kept surfacing in people's comments: what kind of needs are filled by contact improvisation'?
Consuelo: I was interested in figuring out why it's come down that because of privilege like the $125
privilege and the class background privilege, why it is that this environment has developed around
contact; but I don't see that contact itself is this white cultural kind of ...
John: I'm not sure I agree with that, for one thing it's demonstrating the needs ... contact like anything
else is fulfilling certain needs.
Eleva: That's what I was going to say earlier, perhaps it's the white middle class that needs to get in touch
with their bodies.
Tom: What I see it gets down to is am I willing to go into the world receptively and attentively to what's
happening around me and to be in touch with my needs in a particular situation and other people's
needs. I really think it is something about the reason we're here is because we need to be here, else
we wouldn't be here, to learn whatever we're getting from this, and I see it very much in spiritual terms ...
this group of people is here to get what we're getting and I think a lot of people don't need it or are
doing it in another form.
Elizabeth: The same kinds of things that happen in contact are things that I think have happened to other
kinds of people in other situations, like in work situations where men do heavy physical work together
and might have to use their bodies in the same kind of cooperation and same kind of sensitivity to each
other ... but different than a dance situation ... which comes with a different kind of awareness.
Broni: Its purpose is different too.
Mark: This may relate to why this kind of event is strictly one ethnic group or one social class. I'm con-
cerned in society all over the country how it seems there's a great gap between this kind of situation
of workshops and focusing on a specific kind of dance and what I would call the masses ... their
desire to move and to socialize and be part of something which is being generally exploited. For
those people who are not coming to studio spaces and being part of something, the whole word dance
means to them Friday night and swallowing a six pack of beer and going to a bar or disco; I think
it's exploitative and I really feel there's a gap between that space and this space and it's really tough
to breach.
jerry: Contact has a lot in common with folk art and we are a folk ... we invent it as we go along, we
make it out of what we've got and the fact that what we've got is a college education, and money,
and attractive healthy bodies, and good teeth, you know, is different from having a bunch of ma-
hogany trees and a couple of rocks ... Contact improvisation has roots in dance, it was found by
dancers, and it has gone away from being a dance thing; it is a movement form. There are people
here who are not primarily dancers and the form is reaching out toward those people the way some
people seem to think we should be reaching out toward different classes of society or different
ethnic groups.
18 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 3 1977-78
Mark: I feel that there are some aspects of this kind of dance that are slightly different than any kind of
particular outlet that supplies the needs for any particular ethnic group. I really feel that there are
some aspects of contact that are evolutionary .. I can't think, unless somebody can fill the space, of
other kinds of dance in the past which have been this free with sharing and this much touch and con-
nections .. I think this kind of dance is more significant in specific kinds of problems, like sexual
politics, for example, men dancing with men ... and even in the sense that it doesn't rely upon other
forms like music - goes right to an essence or centering ... This form of dance crosses a few more
bridges than others have.
Consuelo: You mean in the sense that it is kind of like a future vision of how people can relate to each
other in terms of sensitivity and activity?
Jon: In terms of sexual politics we're still dealing with one on one, two people getting together, and contact
gives you metaphors for expanding that to three or four or ten or twenty or whatever and that should
be explored too. ·
Keriac: Watching a ballet that gets into these boy.girl things, I don't get much metaphor for my life from
those; whereas I really find the material in contact, the interpersenal stuff that's happening in contact,
is a really useful sophisticated metaphor for what I'm experiencing. ·
Consuelo: Right now I feel really committed to art for change. It's really not enough to do a contact
performance for me, it really isn't. I feel like I want to know more what's going to come out and
deliver a message; and I don't mean just whatever message is there but I mean pretty specific messages.
Kris: There's something about pure energy that gets exchanged between people, we become something
of everything we are around, and when I see a performance I become those performers; and it means
a lot to me and it's the strongest and most pure learning experience I have and it's devoid of content.
It's not statements.
Consuelo: Well, that sounds like a pretty powerful statement.
I see that most of these needs in relation to contact have to do with the desire to break down the uneven
power of the various roles that people assume in relating to one another, be it male to male, dancer to nondancer,
or performer to audience. Contact improvisation as a political process can thus be seen as a means for bringing
people together in a way that prevents or at least discourages the assumption of roles and inequalities of power
which roles so often establish. There seemed to be agreement that, on an immediate personal level, contact achieved
this aim if the integrity of the physical form was respected.
The second issue of the discussion seemed to center around the kind of relationship the contact community
and the contact form is establishing with the larger society. Does and will this relationship maintain the same freedom
from inequalities in power and thus allow all people access to the vital (role-less?) movement relationships which are
contact improvisation?
Karen: The way to deal with it is to work on both levels - one is on the normal ground level of literally
dealing, believing that change takes place and revolution takes place within my own body first and
then at the same time being aware of where my body is: is it in the studio, in Cat's Paw, and that
door is closed unless I have $125, and then what do I do about that; and I think there are two dif-
ferent issues and both are necessary.
Brent: But we made this experience available for ourselves ... at least I did.
Karen: Because it is within your program in life to be able to do that. We're talking about a whole part
of the world where it isn't part of the program - it's not there ... so is art going to be something
we're talking about, an eclectic thing that stays where it is, or can this particular art form go out
because it doesn't have to have all that professional dilettantism that other forms have. Can it just
be a way of reaching people on another basis?
Laurie: Not right now.
john: This is a white middle class trip and other people out of that might not necessarily want to have it.
Volume 3 1977-78 CQICI Sourcebook 19
Laurie: And they might and they can't because they can't afford to.
John: That's not true.
Laurie: If one person wants to and can't ...
John: There have been set up free situations for people to study this and it is only taken by white upper
class people. '
Ernie: Sometimes it becomes a real trip that we are laying on them because we don't have the sensitivity
to know what they need.
Mark: What is the balance between being crusaders for contact and making it an available form for those
that are interested?
John: It is a manifestation I think in many ways of class differences and therefore class problems that we
should deal with; solutions are tough.
Evelyn: Most of the arts are a social ... I mean there's a certain class of people that do them. For a long
time they were a very elitest thing.
Ernie: But is it elitist? That word really blows my mind cause it's a power term. It assumes that if we
develop a dance form, it is automatically elitist. It's a dance form! ... something that came out of
our culture. Our culture may be elitist in a lot of ways - money and social structures generally, but
that doesn't mean the dance form is elitist.
Laurie: But it reflects the society.
Karen: I am forever grateful in one way, in an aesthetic sense, and in other ways, for things that have come
out of formalized, in a sense elitist, art forms and I value them. Then I hear what we're saying on the
other side. Now is there room for both ways to be?
Keriac: If you are thinking of contact as a folk art and experiencing it, it is quite a different setup than if
you are thinking of it as a performing art or a spectator thing. Like Karen was talking about, how can
we have both of these things, that they both enrich our lives? I think that it is facetious to say that
it is a folk art so that we can all rest our minds about that, you know, that we don't have to be con-
cerned about ... that we're clean; this is a folk art, it's ok. One can use contact lots of other ways -
the relative morality, the rightness or wrongness or whether it fits into your value system should be
examined.
Ernie: If you take something like contact ... and you can make it into where you're more sensitive to
life in general, the balances and flux of life in general, then it becomes evolutionary; but if you take
it and it becomes another package, then that's what it is, another package.
Some questions arc asked. concerns expressed and a dialogue begins. I hope the excerpts above may have
provoked thoughts in you and that you will share them with others. It is part of the dance. I hope that l have not
distorted too much the meaning of what people said by taking comments out of context or order. And in reading,
please realize the text above is in some sense my interpretation, my reflection, my recreation of what took place.
You had to be there. . . ·
------fl------
BYRON BROWN is one of the founding members of Mangrove and a member of the Bay Area Contact Coalition who
sponsored Focus: 8/77. He lives and teaches contact in San Francisco, California.
20 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 3 1977-78
IN THE COURSE OF TEACHING
Alan Ptashek
Accept your limits. I ask that students allow themselves the permission to realize their limitations.
I also encourage the sudden stretch beyond limitation. To see within this language the existence of
a subtle yet expansive definition of the word 'risk'. "Isn't that very risky?" asked a student looking
up at a friend pivoting in the valley between neck and shoulder of her partner. I believe this work
and other explorations compatible with Contact always involve the element of risk, whether we are
rolling along air-born arcs or standing still.
As flow does not mean slow, receptivity needn't be measured by passivity. 'Listening' is one of my
favorite words in describing the force behind transition.
Attention needs to wander to stay interested. In the teacher, your partner, yourself. Re-circulate.
Hearing Robert Creely opinionate that the full human attention is there for forty minutes.
The concern for rhythm and balance of class time. Developing trust in the quiet of before and after-
images. The forms of students moving, trucks on the freeway, the teacher's words measured and heard
by breath, inter-relate and create a whole entity.
The class assists a teacher in locating his or her placement between the skills of observance and verbal-
ization. Besides the basic sense of too much or not enough (alternately, I've been told by students
how there is excessive technical input or a frustration due to a casual and modest directive), we learn
to use the word if it fits. Of course there is still much more to say.
In one of his first introductory classes, asking: "ls the contact point the tension between trust and
responsibility?" In agreement - yes, Danny, there seems to be many levels of lifting experience.
Dancing well with new students is the most advanced part of my learning.
______ , ,.. _____ _
ALAN PT ASHEK writes from San Francisco where he lives and teaches. Studying Contact Improvisation since 1974,
he is a member of freefall company. a Bay Area based performing and teaching ensemble.
"It is very tempting for a teacher
to feel he is in possession of an
understanding, that this is his ware
which he sells and peddles; yet a
good teacher peddles confusion
rather than ease, guiding students
through a gentle order of questions,
witness to their discomfort and
fumblings. There are many ways a
teacher can teach, but I think the
soun:e of this ability is a simple
compassion I sense teaching as a
movement or passage on the level
of heart"
Danny Lepkoff
Volume 3 1977-78
CQ/CI Sourcebook 21.
REMEMBERING .......... FORGETTING
It's easy after teaching awhile to forget the beginning, to forget how to share the first steps
of an idea or experience. Remember learning how to walk? It was a logical organic progres-
sion. The body was the teacher. It knew just how to prepare for the next step-it wriggled
and squirmed to get ready to roll, rolled to get ready to creep, creeping became crawling,
crawling prepared for sitting, squatting to standing to falling to standing to stepping to fall-
ing to walking. Watch babies. They have much to teach about how to teach and learn.
In teaching/learning contact improvisation, what are the first steps? What are the basic ex-
periences needed for the next step and the next? Perhaps it would be helpful to remember,
to retrace, the first year of contact improvisation.
What is the last thing you learned?
Can you remember learning it?
How did it happen?
Teaching should reflect the learning process. And learning mirrors the breathing rhythm.
INformation EXploration Pause !Nspiration.
"Oh I get it," said the small child,
"First you think it. Then you see it.
Then you fo~get it. Then it happens."•
That's a good lesson plan. And a reminder to teachers and learners: Remember to forget it.
M.F.: Let nothing be 50% of what you are doing.
Q.: Why?
M.P .: Because not doing is just as important as doing.
Q.: What?
M.P.: Oh forget it.
Q.: How come?
M.P .: It's just as good as remembering."• oo
"small child-an early student of Mabel Todd.
•
0 M.F.-Mary Fulkerson; M.P. -Marsha Paludan.
..: -f
-;;
"' ..s
"' u
"' e
"' "' "'
5 -€
"' u al
"' ::..
..Q ..Q
Qj
:>
~ .c:
..9! :> Q.
"' ..9! "'
-5 ~-c c
"G :> ..
"' "' ..
G: ..9! ..c "'
~
"' ] 3 ~ -5 ;!
"' "' c I» ..0 0 - c:
I!! - i::-€ 0 0
i ~:i-= ~ ~
'!!
:!-S ;~ 3-8 &.
::1..0 Q,) C» Q,) Q,) £
&'»-=-=-=-=
"8
':>.
..c - - - -
£.:: IG IQ IQ IQ 10~~~~
U'I >C x x x ai
cn-talGf'QtO e
'iC ~ I» ~ ~ I»
fO a...c..c..c..c _g
w----- -5 ; ..! .s! ..9! ..9!
gi-S ~ ~ ~ .g
- 0 uuuu
i2 "G .. y "t:i
u ~ t0..0
<
"' £
Marsha Paludan
MARSHA PALUDAN lives and works in Lawrence. Kansas. She has been exploring & teaching release tech-
nique for a number of years. collaborating with Barbara Clark. Mary Fulkerson. John Rolland Nancy TopL and
others. She also creates her own dance pieces. and recently has been doing Contact Improvisation with
a group in Lawrence.
Volume 3 1977-78
22 CQ/Cl Sourcebook
'"'" 1111fffl1'
''"'''' "'"'"'''""''""''
THE SMALL DANCE
EUZABETI-1: At the very beginning of a Contact Improvisation workshop,
teachers often talk about the 'small dance'. Why do _YOU start
with the 'small dance'?
STEVE: Well, first of all, it's a fairly easy perception: all you have to do
is stand up and then relax-you know-and at a certain point you real-
ize that you've relaxed everything that you can relax but you're still
standing and in that standing is quite a lot of minute movement: .. the
skeleton holding you upright even though you 're mentally relaxing.
Now in that very fact of you ordering yourself to relax and yet continuing
to stand-finding that limit to which you could no further relax without
falling down; you 're put in touch with a basic sustaining effort that goes
on constantly in the body, that you don't have to be aware of. It's
background movement static-you know-that you blot out with your
more interesting activities, yet it's always there sustaining you. We 're
trying to get in touch with these kinds of primal forces in the body and
make them readily apparent. Call it the 'small dance' ... It was a name
chosen largely because it's quite descriptive of the situation and because
while you 're doing the stand and feeling the 'small dance' you 're aware
that you 're not 'doing' it, so, in a way, you 're watching yourself perform;
watching your body perform its function. And your mind is not figuring
anything out and not searching for anv answers or being used as an
active instrument but is being used as a lens to focus on certain
perceptions. DC
ELIZABETH ZIMMER interviewing STEVE PAXTON on CBC Radio
bottom
Volume 3 1977-78
CQICI Sourcebook
THE SMALL DANCE, PHYSIOLOGY AND IMPROVISATION
by Ann Woodhull
There is beauty in standing relaxed, allowing body sways to occur and be cor-
rected, doing 'the small dance'. For me, the beauty of the small dance is not only
in feeling it, but also in its biology. "Imperfections" like swaying are necessities
of life; deviations and corrections happen on all levels from molecules to evolution.
By giving some details about the physiology of standing, I can convey these ideas
more concretely.
If one knee starts to bend a little
stretches the muscle in the front of the
hip···~ •••• quadriceps
femur···\)wn muscle
o .. ••knee cap
...
"•tendon
inserting
into bone
Figure 1
nerve from the stretch receptor makes
cells back in the quadriceps. (Figure
while you are standing, that bending
leg above the knee (the quadriceps).(Fig. 1)
Inside this hunk of muscle there are a few
hundred thousand individual muscle cells
and a smaller number of specialized stretch
receptors, as seen in the close-up in
Figure 2A. Because your knee has just
bent, the stretch receptors are pulled
along with the rest of the muscle. Stretch-
ing excites the sensory nerve cells of
these receptors so that they send a burst
of tiny electrical impulses along their
own lengths to the spinal cord. Inside
the spinal cord, sensory nerve cells make
contact with other nerve cells at synapses,
so they can transmit their 11essages. The
a synapse on a motor nerve that excites muscle
2B)
·• •• 2 neTVe eel ls
from stretch
receptor
·····stretch receptor
(the whole
spindle-shaped
structure)
This connection of two nerve cells has
an immediate and interesting result. The
stretching of the stretch receptor causes
it to conduct impulses into the spinal
cord (Figure 3). When these impulses reach
the synapse, a chemical is released that
excites the motor nerve so it also fires
impulses, and these go out of the spinal
cord to the muscle and excite it to contract.
(Muscles normally only contract when nerves
Figure 2A
branch of nerve cell
Cross-section
t:J····spinal column and
of spinal cord .
•
Cl spinal cord
0
• nerve cell body
• • .
.
4nt>ulses
~~--·nerve cell connecting
stretch receptor to
spinal cord
~
stretch receptor
cell
motor nerve
Figure 2B
___.
impulses
Figure 3
24 CQKI Sourcebook
Volume 3 1977-78
from the central nervous system tell them to.)
the knee back up. This whole trip takes only
it takes a lot longer to explain. (Figure 4)
The muscle contracting straightens
a fraction of a second to happen;
Diagram of events in the stretch reflex
knee bends ~stretches muscle and
_..., stretch receptors
,
(knee straightens,
cancellin~e bend) \
stretch receptors
J are excited
muscle contracts
\ sensory nerves convey impulses
to spinal cord
motor nerve sends ~
impulses to excite~ at synapse, motor nerves of
muscle quadriceps are excited
Figure 4
The stretch reflex is a dandy mechanism for keeping standing without thinking
about it, since all this action is at the spinal level, below consciousness (which
resides in the brain somewhere). But in telling about it, I have ignored important
parts of the system: the links to awareness and the controls on the reflex.
Awareness of the knee moving happens
as a result of impulses travelling on
nerve cells up to the brain. The stretch
receptor nerves extend branches up through
the spinal cord to parts of the brain,
to carry information about muscles
stretch (Fig. 5) Also, there are other
nerves coming from tendons, joints, con-
nective tissue, and skin that send mes-
sages concerning stretch, degree of
nerves carrying;.
messages from ,• ..
brain (both
excitatory
and
inhibitory)
bending, pressure, pain, etc. Some-
·····branch of nerve
carrying impulses
to brain
where up in the brain this informa-
tion can reach awareness, but it does
not have to. Whether you are aware of
it or not, the sensory information from
many sources is being integrated in the
brain to aid in balancing. An interest-
ing way to explore what types of infor-
mation are being used is to stand on
one foot and check how much your body
sways. Then close your eyes. Then try
it with your head tilted (so the grav-
ity/balance receptors in your inner ear
are affected), with eyes open and closed.
Does tensing your leg and body make it
harder or easier? (I bet no one has ex-
plored this aspect scientifically. There
are a zillion simple questions unanswered
motor
in this field.)
Control of the stretch reflex is neces-
Figure 5
muscle and
stretch receptor
sary so that we can move. For standing,
your brain "sets" the stretch reflexes in
CQICI Sourcebook 25
Volume 3 1977-78
certain muscles to hold an erect body position, and once set, the reflexes take care
of themselves. Then in order to walk or to fall, you inhibit the stretch reflex to
allow the knee to bend. Awareness and control must be interconnected, as we can
use the information about stretch or bend to inhibit the reflex at just the right
moment to start a walk.
The beauty of swaying and feedback
The stretch reflex is called a feedback system because the information about
how long the muscle is (how much it has been stretched) is "fed back" through the
spinal cord to the muscle contractors or relaxors, to stay the same length. The
alternative to feedback is brute force. A statue doesn't fall over, even in a
fierce wind, because it is exceedingly strong. We are relatively frail, yet we
can stand in the wind, using feedback to check our tilting and to govern our muscles.
As another example of the brute force method, I was talking to a ballet dancer
about the beauty of body sway and feedback. He said, "But I can stand perfectly
still," and he proceeded ta stand quit:e (not; perfectly) still. He was tensing sets
of opposing muscles, being fairly rigid, and swaying very little. I'd call that
modified by brute force. He was in fact using some feedback and some rigidity, or
you could call it a "tight" feedback system with little tolerance of deviation.
It is necessary for the body to sway if it is to use feedback. The deviations
and "failings" arouse mechanisms that take you back toward center. You can try to
get yourself exactly right, dead center, by brute force. Or you can allow deviations
to happen and be corrected. From a biological viewpoint, it's the same w~th popula-
tions as with standing: if there were one perfect person for all conditions, we
should all have the same body type, skin color, vitamin requirements, and so forth.
As it is, the variations have enabled us as a population to survive because we have
the diversity to adapt in the long term.
Using feedback takes less energy. Doing the small dance, one can relax muscles
most of the time, with just a tug here and a twitch there to keep the whole pile of
bones upright. Contrast this relaxed state to the more exact but more energy-consum-
ing task of trying to stand without swaying.
Feedback can be used to guide movements as well as in stillness. As you open
your front door, you are following a pattern of movements. That pattern is probably
generated in the basal ganglia of the brain and sent down the nerves of the spinal
cord. The nerves and reflexes of the spinal cord carry out the brain's orders, at the
same time using feedback to correct for little problems like sticky doorknobs. (See
the Merton article in the bibliography for more on this idea.)
The beauties of feedback are many: the mechanism is adaptable (e.g., to high winds
or tired muscles); deviations don't matter; and the system consumes little energy
for its task. But by definition, feedback is used for goal-oriented behavior,
whether the goal is standing still, or execution of precise movements like typing.
In Contact, we continually use feedback very sensitively, and we transcend it.
Contact is different from other forms of dance in not having long-term goals. In
other dancing, feedback is used to get the movements correct in a certain form. In
Contact we use feedback from moment to moment to compensate for unexpected weight, to
balance, to walk, etc., but not to achieve a correct external form. I think the sen-
sory information gets used in fundamentally different ways, since it's not needed
for "correctness". We use messages from the senses to catalyse change rather than
to stick to a goal.
"Even standing you execute a continual fall." -Steve Paxton
26 CQ;CI Sourcebook Volwne 3 1977-78
~ JOURNAL STUFF
Hooray, a few days ago I achieved a release from my bodily self-consciousness.
We were sitting in a circle watching duets. I had a typically uneasy feeling in the pit of my
gut. Should I go out and dance? Do I have to? I feared that moment when guilt outweighs
self-conscious embarrassment. What would my former lacrosse coach say, (a man I admire
and respect.) "Awww Agnew, you going in for that fruity stuff? What's wrong with you, boy."
Yikes .... I sat in the midst of a subtle form of panic waiting to dance.
A few feet away a woman got up. She was one of the better dancers and served in
some official capacity. God knew what. She started shuffling towards me. When she
reached me she turned and put her head heavily against mine. Oh shit. Who me? Putting
duty before my chicken heart I arose and we began to dance. Our movements were
synchronized. She felt vibrant, alive and at the same time soothing. I could feel tension
easing out of my back like water from a sponge as she rolled across me.
Delightful. I began to dance with a freedom and ease of movement I had never
before experienced. I felt her energy reaching into me. In sort of a psychic body massage it
began caressing my fears away. Even her most sudden movements were taken in stride,
sweet body of ours moving through gravity's pull like water through a sieve. We ended with
exuberance and a righteous finality. I rolled back to my place with a shining shit-eatin grin
spread clear across my face. Jesus, did I feel good. I felt great knowing the bars of my
bodily prison could melt and just dribble away in a few moments of dance. oO
David Agnew
DAVID AGNEW participated in a 3 week Contact workshop at Hampshire College in Amherst, Massachusetts
during January 1977.
HOMEWORK
Go to the Equator and do THE
POLAR TILT.
Stand where you are and ride
the earth's rota tlon
Stand facing the sun with your
eyes closed. Noon Keeping your
eyes closed, rock your weight leg
to leg, turning the whole body
clockwise. See the sun setting off
to your left as you turn Keep
turning until you are on the dark
side. Nighttime. Keep going and
catch the first direct light as it
hits the right side of your face/
body. Dawn Fill your Inner sky
with light as you turn back into
the sun, completing the cycle.
Nancy Stark Smith
Volume 3 1977-78
CQICI Sourcebook 'Z7
EYE IMAGES: Let Your Eyes Go For A Ride In Your Head
By Ellen Elias
Last night in contact class, Danny Lepkoff said, "Let your eyes go for a ride
in your head." I imagined this:
as opposed to this:
A tiny woman, sitting in my eye sockets watching the scenery pass in front of her.
Other times I imagine her straining to get out, trying to look up when my head is
looking down, or simply reaching far ahead of where I am. If I close my eyes and
let her relax deep into my eye sockets, I can imagine her sinking into a soft feather
mattress, and she becomes heavy and soft herself.
I am thinking about eyes: how impor~ant they are on so many levels. Frequently
in contact improvisation we talk about peripheral vision. Often this implies some-
thing about central vision, its importance so great that we don't even need to empha-
size it. In all movement, and even more so in dance, people depend on eyes for bal-
ance, coordination, spatial information, and rhythm. In contact, vision is used
somewhat differently than in other llDVement forms in that often, the eyes are "going
for a ride in your head," and at the same time, the importance of peripheral vision
is emphasized. So I will add this to my drawing:
Now I am imagining two additional tiny women
who are very active. As the first woman sits in
my head getting a free ride, the second and third
women are stretching and looking around towards the
sides of my head, up and down and around. Without
the latter two women I am restricted to the path
of vision of the direction of my head, but with them,
I can relax my eyes while stretching my perception.
In other words, the first woman represents sensation
and the second and third women represent perception
and attention. Try this: look at something directly
in front of you. Now relax your eyes but still look at it. Now, without shifting
the eyeball, think about whatever is to your right and to your left. In my case, I
am looking at the typewriter ribbon; now I shift my attention to the bathroom door
on my right and the bookcase on my left. The original looking is as if the first
woman were reaching forward. Then it is as if she were relaxing and the other two,
becoming active, were stretching to the sides.
Another exercise for eyes is really about not-eyes. We did this during the
Vermont Contact Improvisation Conference last August: in duets, one person closes
28 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volwne 3 1977-78
her/his eyes and th~ other leads her/him wherever their joint energy takes them.
When I did this tlie ' 1 first thing I realized was that I had to trust Ann, my partner.
She ~ my eyes. I could still trust my own sensations but they were limited. I
found myself running and hoping that there would be no rocks in my path. My normal
defense system operates in part through my eyes.
Defenses, and all el!X)tions, register in the eyes. A study was done which showed
that the pupils of people dilate quickly when they see something they find attract-
ive. On the subway or in a crowded elevator people often avert their eyes in order
to avoid what can be an aggressive act: looking directly into the eyes of someone
they don't know. Dogs and cats do the same thing. (I always find it easy to out-
stare my dog. It seems as if he feels it is very aggressive when I look into his
eyes for too long a time.)
To use the word eyes is not quite accurate.
move the eyeballs in their sockets. What I have
the process of vision and part the "kinesthetic
There are seven muscles which
been discussing is actually part
consciousness" (Mabel Elsworth
Todd, The Thinking Body, 1937). Todd wrote:
We are able to say that a table is four feet away or a piano
ten feet, not, as one might suppose, because of any special
quality of vision or a specific reaction to light, but chiefly
by means of the muscular sense. The ability to differentiate
distances is built up from a multitude of impressions conveyed
from the eye muscles used in focusing the visual image upon the
retina •••• Impressions of the work done by the eye muscles as
they move are reported to the brain, where they are interpreted
as indicating a certain distance in space. This interpretation
in turn is effected through an association of ideas or memories
of various cumulative experiences, muscular and tactile, and
of visual impressions of color and size. This is due to memories
of former experiences - movements of the eye, movements of the
body in going towards objects and reaching them, together with
tactile impressions of their shapes, extent and textures derived
from handling them ••• Similar associations of ideas also aided
by the labyrinthine sensations reporting the position of our
he~ds in relation to the earth, enable us to perceive an object
in its actual position, right side up, although the retina receives
an image that is upside down as projected through the anterior
refracting surfaces and media of the eye. pp. 31-32.
Lately in my contact work I have been experimenting with relaxing my eyes,
especially when I am upside down. At first I feel disoriented. This is because
"when an attempt is made to keep the eyes directed so as to move with the head in-
stead of against it, the primary reflexes have to be interrupted, which at once
brings a sense of strain and tension" (Todd, p.103). It is this sense of strain
and tension that I am trying to release. Howeuer, without the labyrinthine balance
mechanism I would not know, after I have flown up and over someone's shoulders,
which way is up and which is down.
The eyes are part of the kinesthetic consciousness that we, as contact dancers,
hope to perceive and sense fully. Different images or fantasies about what is going
on in the eyes can help us to think differently about their activity and help to
change that activity. Some exercises:
"Start the head nodding gently like a toy (the kind of dog you see in the back
windshields of cars). While rocking the head as a delicately balanced weight, note
how the eyes m:Jve automatically against the direction of the head and how their
vision is kept focused on the horizon." (Todd, p.103).
Volume 3 1977-78 CQICI Sourcebook
"Lay a tape on· tihe ground for a guide, then with an opera glass or field
glass look down at your feet through the large end, and see how straight you can
walk. You will find it very hard to keep on the tape so long as you keep looking
at your feet through the glasses." (Todd, p.115).
Draw a squiggly line on paper. Place mirrors on the vertical sides of the
inside of a small cardboard box and place the paper inside. Looking only in the
mirrors and not directly at your hand, try to trace the line. (This exercise I
remember from a high school fair.)
Rub your hands quickly together until they are very warm. Cup the hands and
place over the eyes.
Spinning: start slowly. One foot turns out, the next parallel. Turn out,
turn parallel, repeat. Begin w~ile hands are in front of you, held together,
elbows bent. As the momentum begins to build let your arms slowly release and they
will extend to the side. Your eyes rest in your head, unfocused, although they
will try, from time to time, to fix on something. If they do you will notice you
become dizzy very quickly. Also, any sudden change, like bending your arms quick-
ly, will result in dizziness·. Come to a stop very gradually the way you began.
Focus on your hands as they come together. (It is a good idea to have a friend
stand near you in case of sudden dizziness. The friend should, if s/he sees that
you are starting to lose your center, extend her/his arm and continue walking in
a circle with you until you are alright.) With this technique of nonspotted spin-
ning I spun for 45 minutes for the first time recently. Among my other discoveries
I realized that I can let my eyes remain unfocused while I move for a long time.
Copyright October, 1977
Ellen Elias
--.
I
1~
30 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 3 1977-78
,,
~~--+-+--+-+--+-+
, ___ +-+....,....;-+-+-+
,_-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
, __ -+-+_-+-+
' '
.
~
I
cc
s
't"i
-
:;
0
......
I
.
I
INFORMATION SHEET
The words "Contact lmprovisation"neatly describe work of an evolving
movement form, affectionately known as Contact. Contact Improvisation is the
beauty of natural movement combined with full communication.
Rather than working towards masterpiece repertory, Contact is an on-
going investigation of immediate action, yielding to flow and the economy
of force. Some fundamental views it contains: all forms are constantly changing,
all forms participate as parts of larger forms, and nature tends to equilibrium.
Participation in Contact lmprov is a study of movement through aware-
ness and a study of awareness through movement. It provides a joyous
meeting ground for moving bodies in spontaneous, genuine, un-self -conscious
flow as parts of a larger whole: two movers, one duet.
To an unaccustomed eye this activity smacks of rough-housing, love-
making, wrestling or martial arts. ·Actually participants learn to move together
on a common path of least resistance in which impulses, weight and momen-
tum are communicated through a point of physical contact that continually
rolls around their bodies. Like bolos, fluid and · eccentrically weighted, the
moving bodies swing, bounce, roll, swim and fly around with a common center
of gravity. These skills are developed in non-competitive classes through
relaxation and patient physical discipline, in direct association with other movers.
DO
Curt Siddall
CURT SIDDALL has participated in the development of Contact lmprov through perfonnance, teaching and writing
since helping to initiate the movement almost6 years ago. In addition to being a ce>founding director of Berkeley
Moving Arts, Curt is a member of San Francisco based MANGROVE. a performance collective of 8 men and
REUNION; a touring company comprised of Contact Improvisation's early developers.
Volume 3 1977-78
CQ/CI Sourcebook 31.
A FEW (TIGHT) MARBLES FROM MY TEACHER'S NOTEBOOK
Human body moves, steps into the stream of information, absorbs change, and
grows to become the body of knowledge.
Information is gathered, invented, codified, organized by finders of form. In
form, at ion-level and all the way out towards all universe, units of fact are dis-
covered in their arrangement, pattern, shape. Muscles structures, skeletal mech-
anics, nerve-sensations are examples of existing phenomena which can be perceived
by mind and feeling, about which humans articulate language so that a system emerges,
a matrix of facts that can be studied, increased, modified, transmitted.
Dynamic information flow is the learning situation. It exists as soon as a
human recognizes a capacity to know about something and feels the need/desire to
exercise that capacity. All learning begins with the learner.
In Contact Improvisation what the learner learns is her/his own body, going
to the body as the source of knowledge and delivering to the body all the informa-
tion gathered. Humans who learn often begin to share their bodies with other humans;
allow their flesh, brain, and imagination to be a pathway through which information
may flow; such humans when they are in condition of being employed by learners as
resource are called teachers.
Teachers, given ego-logical structures as part of human nature, can and do
seek learners, can and do make mistakes, can be and often are astonished by what
they learn.
Contact Improvisation, the form as teacher, teaches us to follow the mutual
energy pathway and to avoid follower/leader patterns. Some human persons have had
speculations about how to teach the form; some wonder whether it can be taught.
There hovers some difficulty in semantics, having to do with the idea that Contact
Imp is a special sort of form, that it is not a system, like tennis, with rules of
play; perhaps Contact Imp is more like an attitude, and being a contactor is like
being an American, or a Buddhist, or a poet.
What about the duet, the round robin, the 58? What about the meditations, the
small dance, the leaps and falls? Aren't they knowledge? Can't they be learnt?
Can't they be taught?
Certainly they are, and can be. Just because a river is full of ever-changing
Water does not mean a human can't learn the river: the pools remain pools, the
rapids occur wherever the rocks are just so. Just so, the arm and the leg support
weight in a fairly predictable way, and the person attached can learn to use them
to accomplish acts -- sharpening the pencil, paddling the canoe, balancing on the
partner's back and falling off unharmed.
The teacher, by the permission of learners, seeks to form a shape out of units --
exercises, moods, images, ideas -- so that the learner can find a clear way to ap-
proach, to find body. Often the teacher represents the body of knowledge by putting
a shoulder to the wheeling learner, articulating events directly in flesh-language.
Often the teacher uses word-language as well to address the mind, imagination, feel-
ings; to guide attention, to help the process of self-discovery. Observation, ques-
tion/answer, repetition, analysis, experiment are some of the shapes information
flow takes -- just as water can be found in waves, ripples, eddies, raindrops, and
32 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 3 1977-78
cocktails and sti).Dbe water -- and these shapes can be devices to facilitate
learning.
Certainly Contact Improvisation, since it is a form, can be learnt, and any-
thing that can be learnt also can be taught. To say otherwise is to begin playing
with language -- a fascinating and valuable activity, and a device of information
itself. In discussion about the form it will be wise always to avoid confusion in
mixing levels of discourse, to avoid being unclear as to whether one is speaking of
the physical or the metaphysical counterbalance; the classroom moment or the class-
ification of moments; of momentum as applied to spinning, as applied to planetary
orbits, as applied to non-applied sub-atomic physics theory. There has always been
a care to keep language precis.e and spare in regard to Contact Improvisation, and
that care is part of learning the form.
A minimalization of effort, the efficiency of movement which is grace, is es-
sential to the form of Contact. It is that grace the teacher helps the learner
look for, stepping together into the flow, moving with it, playing in it, working
through_ it, towards the simultaneity of human body and body of knowledge, growing
to be the body of light.
Jerry Zientara
-
,
•
-
J
- - -
-
1 II
-
- L
-
-
....
~
---
' -
-· -
Volume 3 1977-78 CQ/CI Sourcebook 33
,,,,. 0 I
-
,..,,,,.: .....
J,l_J
\ : n
FEEDBACK FROM VERMONT
CONTACT CONFERENCE: 8177
... I think that one of the most
important elements for me in the
classes is the atmosphere genemted
in the room by thP warm- up.
00
.. The classes seemed to lack a
consistent development of building
skills. I would have liked to have a
clear" techniques of Contact" class
that focused on the development
of the more acrobatic skills and a
sepamte time or class that focused
on dancing. improvising together
to develop partner sensitivily. space
awareness. rhythm-time aware
ness - how to play together.
It really helped me to have
centering work in the beginning,
and to follow a gradual path into
contact and more activity. When
this did NOT happen. I found ii
very difficult to find the flow in
myself. 1"here were a few classes
in which we were brought quickly
together. and told·· Do rolls"; "Now
do this- now do that" and given
very little time for warming up our
bodies. or warming up to each
other. It was these times that all
my unsurelies would surface("What
should I do- what shouldn't I do"),
making dancing frightening.
QC
The few chances I had to
dance with really experienced
contacrors helped the most The
most difficult times I had were
coupling u:itl)_another beginner
when neither one of us had any
idea how to proceed.
OCI
34 CQ/CI Sourcebook
TEACHER TEACHING
What becomes a teacher
that becomes a teacher?
The function of a teacher is to help the learner learn. preparing the learner to find
out themselves.
skill/ tact equals visibility/ invisibility e~uals tact I skill
having become experienced is a debt to the forces-that-be that we must constantly
acknowledge. We are privileged to pass on the sensitizing information, relaxing infonnation,
strengthening information, information of the forces-that-be.
Is it true? that: the learner learns to be partly the self & partly the teacher
thus the implantation continues through the generations
so the skill for our arts is the model of no model
thus leaving the motivation in the student, in the way we would want to retain
power over ·our. lives while at the same time retaining the option to
release control·
the dancing does the teaching. the teacher points to that.
teacher is the manager for a long concert (all the classes, end to end)
which teacher sees with eyes-that-can-see and so shows the others how-to-see
so gradually the learners learn to see and the special position of teacher
can be shared. teacher becomes special learner, using the energy granted
by the class to learn ever more intensely.
Does the class seek purity? If so,
special learner will receive pure energy and pure intensity.
this is the power of the special learner. The power granted by the learners
is only equal to the power developed by the teacher in the learners.
Does the teacher poach the motivation· of the class? Does the teacher teach
the poaching of personal power? Then the special learner will receive impure
energy colored with power play and gland games.
quality to quality, receiving what is given. a volley ·ball of Karma.
MATERIALS: physical sensations, patient discipline. Activity preserving the integrity of
. the sensations of the forces. materials strengthening the ability to stay oriented.
Communicating these to the body as directly, gently, simply, humbly as can be.
Endeavor to grow strength organically.
As taught, so one tends to teach. Could the teacher enjoy a class. taught by their
'I student's student? beyond the brief moment of transmission is a long, a potentially
life-long association. Our Karma will be clear & irrevokable, not only bad or good.
Consider: sitting & rocking one day and examining the chain forged moment to moment,
over the years. Memory of the forces-that-were, ourselves among them. oo
Steve Paxton
This article is reprinted from Summer 1976 issue of Contact Newsletter (Vol I No. 51. STEVE PAXTON is
an inveterate Contactor and is interested in improvisation.
Volwne3 1977-78
. LETTER FROM A STUDENT
FEEDBACK FROM VERMONT
CONTACT CONFERENCE: 8177
... It helped to have more than
one "teacher" in the big classes. I
think this has to do with a sense
of community and "us & them"
When only" the U!Clcher" was there.
I felt more like a student Having
teachers continue to come. not all
the time. but fairly frequently,
emphasizes the joint learning that's
professed and decreases the gap
between US and THEM
00
To help large size factor.
perhaps there could be more em
phasis on being sensitive to the
emotional elements of the work.
NOT to act on them but rather to
be AWARE of your own emotions.
your partner's emotions; not tiying
to ignore them or divorce their
presence totally from the work.
Dear Steve, Nancy, Lisa,
This evaluation form has been sitting around for awhile waiting to
be mailed, still blank in the 'open spaces', and now back at
Bennington what I appreciated most about the conference has
been thrown into sharp relief. That is the space there was for
discovery, the openness to new solutions. Here (Bennington College)
is is assumed that what I want to know is . already known, by
people who can teach it to me. But what I value most is what I find
myself. I like my teachers best who give me intimations of a vast
region to be explored, a few signposts and maybe a sketched map,
but never a guided tour. I felt so free to wander in Putney, called
back by my perception of what was happening around me, rather
than by breathing in various counts and plies - these things have
their uses but the other, less programmed exploration spreads out
into my life so much more gracefully, calmly, without residues of
tension. So thank you. And I feel that I am going to learn a lot here
this term - am very excited by the fledgling contact group, for
which there is much enthusiasm. I am still warming up
Namasti Love,
Patti Moss
Bennington, Vermont
""°
... Even a small circle, well defined,
adds a dimension of PERSONAL
SPACE
... The form was flow. My reaction
was to participate. Conte.n~ if
generous. allowed for individual
discoveries. If specific, is more
limiting Both existed in the classes.
Both worlced and didn't work Time
to discover helps the most Specific
feedback at the right. time helps.
Content needs to follow a thread .
of guided intuition
... The teaching seminars were
the most meaningful aspect of the
conference . .. tlie clarity of teacher
student interaction expressed at
the conference really illustrated why
a love of subject matter is the ideal
impetus to teach
oO
.. My biggest growth was getting
the sense that I AM doing Contact
not just learning or a student of . .
. I see this sense can come at any
technical stage- anyway. it came.
oO
Volume 3 1977-78 CQICI Sourcebook 35
IN PRAISE OF BADDANCING
I learn from knowing I am uncomfortable, and going ahead; and the
going ahead being the letting-go-ahead. So the discomfort is to be appreciated.
It is an environment from which springs an opening. Contact embraces this
fear of itself. this seminal verge.
We are concerned with where the dancing originates. At times it
appears to me that the important thing is not the dancing in the center of the
circle. but the experience on the edge of the circle, the often disquieting
dance on the verge. This view, which might be seen as antithetical to the
work. is also necessarily part of its premise. The invitation to feel the dread of
opening is an inherent part of the total occurrence.
Dances in which both bodies ride a shared wave of truly unleashed
rise and falling are rare. Yet the dances which abound - halting, starting
repeatedly, responding to impulses a fraction of a second too slow to flow,
doubting one's perceptions - are rich with valuable information, honest
manifestation of fluctuation between positive and negative response. We
fear surrender. make our homes in the almost, and venture into readiness
only when we must. The discomfort at the verge serves by intensifying the
contrast: the darks get darker, the lights lighter, and the picture gets easier
to see.
I value this work not only for the rare glimpses of in-touch, in-time,
in-tune. but for the companionship of the ever-present indications of what is
possible. The form itself, if one exists beyond the instances of attempts to
experience it. is none other than the existence of the possibility of a dance in
which wills. instincts. and verges merge. Emergency, emerge, merge. It
amounts to having to believe in a possibility which one may never have .
experienced.
All this to say I am devoted to something which I rarely feel, the
possibility of which I never leave. We extend to ourselves an invitation which
we rarely accept. but the extension of it is what matters. Living for so long on
the verge of that acceptance, I figure it's time to call it home. o0
Christina Svane
CHRISTl:\A SVA'.\:E :s a dancer·poet·teacher·video artist living in New York City.
36 CQICI Sourcebook
CONTINENTAL DMDE
a gravity warm up
Stand In Colorado facing North.
Align your skeleton along the forces
of gravity, sending your weight
evenly down through your bones
back to the earth. Remember the
center of the earth, tis density.
Empty of idea. full of sensation,
feel the small dance, the delicate
Inner balancing act of a 2-legged
creature; falling gently cin and off
center, weaving about your axis.
Feel the rise of the earth's strength
back through your bones.
supporting your stand
Let your arms float up from your
sides, parallel to the earth" s curved
surface; legs equally weighted.
Gradually fill your right leg with
more weight, letting the left grow
empty. Meanwhile softly reach
·eastward with your right arm; stay
within a comfortable balance. When
yo'1 re near the edge of that balance,
extend your arm a bit further, so
you can reach the Atlantic Ocean
Dip your fingertips In Gradually
bring your weight back ovP.r tnto
the left leg from the right- 20%,
50%, 70%; reaching, without
stretching, the left arm out towards
the Western shore, dipping your
fingers Into the Pacific. Back
through center to the East. dip,
through to the West, dip. Each
time send less of your weight out
to either side, leaving most of It
centered and running down
through your bones, until you are
just barely rocking; balanced tn
the middle of the Divide.
Nancy Stark Smith
Volwne 3 1977-78
Volume 4
1978-79
A DEFINITION..
Contact Improvisation is a duet art-sport currently receiving international attention by those insti-
tutions concerned with new departures in the forms of dance.
Dena Davida, Carol Harwood photo: Marc-Andre Gagne
In the years since the inception of Contact Improvisation, in 1972, it has been adopted as perform-
ance mode by some 10 dance companies across the U.S., and used as a teaching technique by those
grass roots dance organizations, institutions and individuals concerned with investigation of d'ance
improvisation ephemera before the concerns of art aesthetics arise.
It is an activity related to familiar duet forms such as the embrace, wrestling, martial arts, and the
jitterbug, encompassing the range of movement from stillness to highly athletic. The exigencies of
the form dictate a mode of movement which is relaxed, constantly aware and prepared, and on-flow-
ing. As a basic focus, the dancers remain in physical touch, mutually supportive and innovative, me-
ditating upon the physical laws relating to their masses: gravity, momentum, inertia and friction.
They do not strive to achieve results but rather, to meet the constantly changing physical reality with
appropriate placement and energy. ~
Steve Paxton
Volume 4 1978-79 CQ/CI Sourcebook '37
John Faichney
In looking forward to the European performances of
MOMENTING, it was readily apparent that the piece
could not be restaged intact each time. After toying with
some of the formal manipulations that might be imposed
upon it, I finally chose to let the piece be adapted to the
situation as I found it. In the context of formalism, the
'piece' became a piece about 'MUTATIS MUTANDIS':
about 'making the necessary changes'; e.g., on the level of
multiple performance.
38 CQ/CI Sourcebook
photo: Lance Segusa
... the resolution for myself of what constitutes the real?
actual? performance problem: to fall. So that the main-
tenance of a uniform momentum does not become exhaus-
ting, I have found it necessary to subordinate that occur-
rence to the rule of weight, imprisoned by gravity: that,
as long as I can fall, the RELEASE will give me the energy
to rise again, but THE SENSE OF WHAT WILL PROVIDE
THE RELEASE IS THE KEY TO THE ORGANIC DEVE-
LOPMENT OF VARIATION. CX2
Volume4 1978-79
Three Poems for the Contact
Quarterly
1.
I want to go where everybody wears
Lots of lace or little bits of lace, where
Lace grows on trees for easy picking,
For a long while, and take you with.
2.
It's the delicacy of the grip that does the
Gripping, leaning out over counterbalancing
The weights with wing of gravity, relaxed
Holding so close to letting go you'll
Know for sure as signals cross the junction
Twixt the tetrachords, hum the whole quartet
Of double systole, double diastole.
3.
Restore new life to old sponges!
Marie-Marie sponge rejuvenator !
So simple a child could do it!
Jerry Zientara
Volume 4 1978-79
CQICI Sourcebook 3J
JUNIOR! HOW JUMP CAN YOU FAR? 1
1 Child's cry overbedrtl in a playground.
by Jerry Zientara
By arranging and rebalancing our scrutiny and
our relaxation of focus in our daily routine we
find ways to our appropriate redemptions. The
constant prayer that leads the pilgrim, Saint
Therese's "little way", the yogi's systems of
breathing, and the mover's attention to the body
as it washes, waits for the bus, cleans out the
catbox or ties a shoelace are among ways we
focus our being towards whatever unexpectable
or hoped-for visionary experience waits grace-
fully for us.
Verbal languages and body languages both pre-
sent regions of articulation, regions of common
understanding, and regions of the unknown. By
looking at "what we know" we approach the fas-
cinating places of "the unknown". Historically,
Contact Improvisation began with everything un-
known and in the recent handful of years, a body
of knowledge, perhaps a grammar of words and
motions, has been evolving. We know we belong
to the same tribe because we understand each
other; we share a context.
flexibility active bounce round robin
circle breath play partner
attention gravity momentum pathways
floor honest dialogue wave
trust weight float stillness
skeleton mood glide interfacing
contact rise skin center
(This example is a random selection from lists of
"words related to Contact improvisation" made
during a writing seminar led by Nancy Stark Smith
in Seattle, January 1979.)
By now, hundreds and hundreds of people have
had some exposure to the form and its language,
through classes, workshops, performances, re-
views, magazines, and photographs. People from
all walks of life have attempted to describe, ana-
lyze, teach Contact in terms of their own vocab-
ularies, which range from the scientifically
spare to the wildly rhapsodic. Meeting changes
and development within the practice of the form
and colliding, assimilating, and crossing with
words from other contexts, the language of Con-
tact Improvisation attempts to stay clear, direct,
and as immediate as the movement itself.
The very obvious and the very subtle are al-
ways present in any utterance, pose, or figura-
tion. Understanding the shapes and shades of
meaning and of momentum is as easy and as dif -
ficult as understanding music or the weather.
Embodying a concept may or may not use words
before, during, and/ or after; when we seek
discourse, the universe of words enters the pic-
ture. While a woman rolls in a wavelike motion
across the floor, another woman waves to her,
waving her hand. - (Homonym phenomenon.)
40 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume4 1978-79
During "the stand", a condition of vertical
rest, in which the skeleton is balanced so the
muscles don't have to work to hold the body up,
small adjustments and rebalancings were noted
to go on involuntarily. When the accumulating
jiggles and twitches were seen to be a continuity,
there had to be something to call it, and it is
"the small dance". This happened in the old days.
Also in the old days, so many experimental move-
ments were attempted that they were. given num-
bers. These days the only one that is called by
its number is "the 58". "58" is a vault pivoting
off the partner's thighs, around hip-to-hip, rol-
ling over an arc across the partner's back, fi-
nally rolling off into the air or someplace else.
Influx and innovation occur in oi.tr lingo through
borrowings like aikido rolls, t' ai chi stepping;
forward rolls; from physics and metaphysics we
adapt and adopt referent points like counterbal-
ance, chakra, yoga asanas, field .energies, ma.g-
netism. Innovative word-invention can produce
terms immediately understandable, for example,
Simone Forti's use of "artsport" soon swept the
Contact village and one feels again how perfect
a word it is coming upon the ungainly "sportart"
in a newspaper clipping. Other terms like "blotto
dance" never quite caught on. "Finger ouija"
may or may not be current.
Obviously Contact's language functions among
practitioners-only groups, and in mixed groups
which include non-contactors. In the former case,
assumptions are frequently taken for granted,
based on common experience. Just as you can
tell at once if your partner is really in kinetic
dialogue with you, when verbal conversation flows
the words are subsidiary to the moment, suppor--
tive of the meaning. In the case of the latter,
often contactors find ourselves making wild anal-
ogies with rock-climbing or talus-running (which
we may not have done a whole lot of ourselves),
trying to clarify concepts without having to de-
monstrate at cocktails just what a 58 is. When
we are faced with a reporter, our mother, a
dance teacher, a baseball fan, or a child who
sees us doing it in the park, what words do we
call up? At the best of these moments the prin-
ciples that live within our process emerge mo-
mentarily, and some of the phrases stay around.
Repeating definitions, describing the same mo-
ment several times, feeding our words and ges-
tures into the common experience keeps refining
and redefining and refinding the same· old gravity
and change.
Volume 4 1978-79
~~~~If~~ R41ke
~~~~~cf~~~ fJ_,
~ {,. ~ ~~~~·~~+~
'$f. <#-~ !.~~t. {f ~1 !:.
~~ ~ "R~ ~~~c{~~
&~'4cQ~© ~~f?~
~~~t4&r~~tr ~
'tc ~~ ~~~~(j~.f
~~~~~'f§~l-7
#MQf 9m.ff ~1111
(Where two frames of reference cross, forming
four corners, linear transmissions fan out to-
wards new forms in old formats, and variant con-
ditions, as "from visceral to visual", verbal to
ideogrammatic .)
CQ/CI Sourcebook 41.
The frame of reference of transmission at its
clearest is in the actual movement when mind and
body play with each other.'retting go. Sometimes
after a duet we have no words because the exper-
ience was its own verb, its own noun. Art in
teaching, healing, presentation relies upon arti-
culation of the parts, knowing the anatomy, the
syntax. As we come to know the form we learn
its languages, and we change and it changes and
we keep finding the known.and the unknown, like
the subtle and the obvious, in every gesture and
utterance. It will stay like this and keep on going.
Will you come for it? What are the wild waves
saying?
Questions for discussion.
1. How can an axis function as an axiom, an
axiom as an axis?
2. Do you say: Do it this way OR This is how
we do it?
3. Do you say: Let's have/make/do some
Contact Improvisation?
L.. Do you ever hear or use words in Con~act
Imp situations which you don't understand?
Do you ask what they mean?
5. Do you ever stand under your partner?
6. What one word or phrase in the Contact lm-
proVisation common usage (or not so common)
needs most attention now?
7. What movement most needs a name?
8. Can you tell a very brief story using all the
words in Example 1? ls it easier to rear-
range the order? Is alphabetical order more
yielding or more resistant to you?
9. In this drawing, what is happening? How can
you relate it to the other drawing (Example
2)? ls c_ontinuity or framing the more obvi-
ous or the more subtle in each?
10. How would you explain 58 to your mother?
How would you explain the contact point to
a spy-novel writer?
42 CQ;Cl Sourcebook Volwne4 1978-79
CENTER OF GRAVITY
by Ann Woodhull
"Center of gravity" seems to have a lot of meanings for dancers. If you look the term up in a
physics book, you find about half a page; they seem to think that it's so simple as not to be worth discussing
a lot. But the concept is pretty deep when you think about it and use it to look at movement. Here I will
be talking about center of gravity in the same physical sense that a physicist would use the term. I will leave
aside meanings such as "center from which you move" or "spiritual center," and try to show the richness of
the simply physical interpretation. However, I am emphatically not saying that dance is "nothing but
physics" - more about that later. First I will explain and define the center of gravity for a rigid body, and
then talk about the more interesting cases when the body changes shape and the center of gravity changes.
C.Onsider the shapes in the first picture as made of flat cardboard, and imagine that you want to
balance each one on its edge on a pencil. Where would you put the pencil for each one so it would not
turn or fall?
Then suppose they were turned around, as below. Now where does the supporting point need to be for each?
OK, what does this balance stuff have to do with the center of gravity? I assert that there is a
unique point in or near each of these shapes, such that whenever this point is above the point of s11r--ort,
the shape wil I be balanced. This unique point is called the Center of Gravity. Another way to defin.
center of gravity is the point around which the body is perfectly balanced: if you stuck a support through
the center of gravity, you could turn the body any way, and it would still balance, not tending to tip in any
direction.
Volume 4 1978-79 CQ/CI Sourcebook 43
Now you really need to cut out a shape of cardboard and try it, to see if this concept works. Cut
out an odd shape like one above, but bigger. Put it flat up against a vertical surface like a wall so it can't
flop over, and balance the edge on a pencil. When you find one way it balances, hold it still and draw a line
straight up from the point of contact. Now balance it on a different edge,
and draw another line straight up from this other point of contact. The
two lines will meet, and this point of meeting should be the center of
gravity. Is it? Well, if it really is, then any time this point is above the
point of support, the shape should balance. TRY IT in other positions.
Does it balance? Try putting the center of gravity above the point of
contact but to the left of it. Now the shape falls to the left, doesn't it?
The diagram below shows the forces. The two forces (weight and support).
aiming past one another, create torque
that turns the body. Whenever the
center of gravity is not over the point
of contact, the body tends to turn and fall on the side where the center
of gravity is. It's as if all the mass were concentrated in the center of
gravity. We use this turning and falling a lot. When you are standing and
you allow your center of gravity to wander until it's not over your feet
any more, then you start to fall in that direction; you can allow the fall
to continue, or use the momentum to go into a walk.
To go back to the first shapes, here they are again with the centers
of gravity I found for each. Notice that in one case the center of gravity
is outside the figure! This is hard to conceive of, except if you try to balance the shape many ways and see
where the lines converge. Another way of getting an image of a center that is outside a body is to think of
a donut. For a donut, the center of gravity has to be inside the hole, no way around it.
The formal physical definition of center of gravity gives another perspective. Think of the body as
a set of segments, each of which has its own mass and position. The center of gravity is the point at which
the sum of all those masses times their (directional) distances is zero - the point at which all those masses
on all their lever arms cancel each other out. For a simple example, think of a seesaw. If one person on
the seesaw is a lot heavier, the lighter person can still make a balance by sitting way out on the end, to get
leverage. To be exact, each person on the seesaw has a turning force (torque) equal to her/his mass times
her/his distance from the balance point. So this combination in the picture would be balanced (assuming,
oh physics!, a weightless seesaw board).
44 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume4 1978-79
Using the definition, it is possible to calculate the center of gravity for real people in different
positions. I analyzed these two pictures and marked each person's center of gravity with an X. The
tracing is my working drawing for the calculations of center of gravity.**
In the first photograph, notice how Nita's body balances around her left leg. Her right leg is
sticking out, balanced by her head and torso leaning the other way. The head and torso are not leaning
far, but they are much heavier than the leg. Her center of gravity is close to the "normal" position for a
standing person (inside the pelvis, a little below the belly button), and it is directly above her foot, so she's
stable. In that same picture, it's not immediately clear whether Steve is leaning on Nita or not. But see,
his center of gravity is not directly above his supporting foot, so he must be leaning on her, or be falling.
Comparing Steve's posture to normal standing, his left leg is tilted up and sideways relative to the straight
line of his torso, and his left arm is also up and to the side. Hence, his center of gravity is not so near his
belly button, but is displaced up and to the left. From the cases I've looked at, the center of gravity can
move around 6 or 8 inches from its standard position in the body - not a huge distance, but enough to
make a difference. Because the head and torso are so heavy (being about 55% of the total weight of most
people), the center of gravity tends to stay around the belly.
L
Volume 4 1978-79 CQICI Sourcebook 45
0
0
"§.
Llsa Nelson, Danny Lepkoff
The photo with Lisa Nelson nicely illustrates some points: her center of gravity is outside her body,
but it is still above the area of support, making a stable position. Note how her different body segments
extend to the left and right of the support, but they balance out. A lot of parts, particularly her legs, are
hanging off to the left of the center of gravity, but they are cancelled out by the weight of her torso and
thighs to the right.
We change center of gravity when we change shape, and often compensate so automatically that we
aren't even aware of it. For example, if I start out standing and bend forward, my center shifts forward and
I'd fall right over if I didn't make immediate subtle corrections. I allow my legs to tilt back, so my hips
are shifted back and my new center is above my feet. If you don't believe it, try this trick: stand with
your back against a wall, then try to lean forward without falling over. You can't because your automatic
corrections are prevented. However, sometimes our "instinctive" changes of center of gravity do not com-
pensate correctly. I used to do this one: when up in a "flying angel," and feeling insecure, I would try
46 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volurne4 1978-79
to save myself by putting my arms up above my head and bending my knees. Then I'd fall on my head
fast, because both these moves shifted my center towards my head.
The height of the center of gravity affects stability. The further your center is above your base of
support, the less stable you are. Lying flat on the floor on your stomach, you are extremely stable, having
a low center and huge base of support. Now if you arch your arms and legs up off the floor, you are less
stable and find it easier to get mobilized. Why? Your base is smaller and your center of gravity further off
the floor, both factors making you less stable.
In Contact Improvisation, we purposely change center of gravity in order to move. When you are
rolling on another person, you change your body shape, the center of gravity and point of support change,
and you move - not because you have pushed or pulled yourself {and if you do it slowly, not by imparting
momentum to your body), but simply by shifting center of gravity and allowing gravity to do the rest.
When your center is no longer above the support, your whole body starts to move. This way of initiating
movement looks and feels very different from grabbing and pulling. I think a lot of the visual and tactile
thrill of Contact comes from support and movement that is non-grabby, non-invasive. Shifts in the center
of gravity of the person supported and shifts in support by the bearer lead naturally to mutual, shared motion.
In many situations, the idea of center of gravity alone is not enough for analyzing the mechanics.
When there is more than one point of contact, the center of gravity no longer has to be over a point of
contact. One easy example is a person standing on two feet equally; then the center is directly over a spot
between the two feet. Not bad. But if the person is leaning hard against something, the situation isn't
even symmetrical. You have to consider not only the two forces we've thought about so far (gravity and
the resistance of the floor), but all the other forces, acting at angles to one another, and how they tend to
push and pull and turn the body.
When a body is moving, the physics gets complicated fast. As long as a person is static or moving
so slowly that momentum is small, the center of gravity tells a lot. However, in analyzing real movement
physically, you have to consider momentum, acceleration, angular momentum from whole-body turning
and from turning at joints, and so on. For vivid examples of bodies in motion, look at pictures of Contact
Volume 4 1978-79 CQICI Sourcebook Lf7
Improvisation. Your eye immediately tells you whether a person was probably in motion, or whether
s/he could be stable in a particular pose. Your well-educated intuition fills in the blanks of where the
body must be moving to, what momentum it must have had to get to such a position.
One application of the center of gravity concept to a fast-moving body is quite useful, though -
that's when the body is in air. During a free jump, there are no outside forces on your body once you
leave the ground. As you go up, travel through space, and come down, your center of gravity describes
a parabola, no matter what your arms, legs and head are doing. At the top of that arc is where you have
minimum velocity (none up or down for an instant, but some in a forward direction maybe). Minimum
velocity means minimum momentum (momentum= mass x velocity), so that's the time it is easiest for
someone else to receive your body with least impact. If the other person then allows you to nearly follow
the curve you were on, the motions look smooth and little force is required, little impact is experienced.
This physics is all very interesting, but does it do anything for our dancing? Rarely, I'd say -
mostly in learning and practicing skills. For me, the physicist's view of center of gravity is quite intellectual;
I don't sense directly where my center of gravity is. I sense some results of where it is, as the pressures on
my feet as my weight shifts around, and other sensations. ---
What happens in dance does follow the laws of physics, but to view Contact Improvisation as
simply physics - or worse, to experience it as simply physics - is not my aim. Despite this long article,
I am wary of thinking and talking too reductionistically. I certainly don't want to contribute to making
Contact an abstract form that is only about physics and not about humans. Contact is about communication
and sharing, and one element we share is playing with the consequences of physical laws.
**FOOTNOTE
I used a standard but tedious way of finding the body's center of gravity from the maso; of each segment
and its location (see Wells and Luttgens, Kinesiology, 1976, pp 270-275).
1) I located the center for each joint (dots in my tracing).
2) I joined the dots and used "well-known proportions" (other people's data) to find the center of mass
of each segment; for example, the center of mass of the thigh is supposed to be 33% of the distance
from the hip to the knee. (X's in tracing.)
3) Taking an arbitrary point as reference, I found the distance of each segment's center of mass from that
point, measured as 'x' and 'y' coordinates.
4) Not having the actual masses of the body segments of each person involved, I assumed values from the
literature for the percent of body weight in each segment. Although total weight varies a lot, people
don't differ too much in how the weight is distributed, so this is reasonably OK.
5) I multiplied the mass of each segment by its 'x'-coordinate and added these products. Then I multiplied
each mass by its 'y'-coordinate and added these products. Thus I had the vector (directional} sum of all
the masses times their distances. Dividing each sum by the total mass, I got the 'x' and 'y' coordinates
of the center of gravity. C'3..
ANN WOODHULL teaches biology at Hampshire College in Amherst, Massachusetts and has been doing Contact for a year
and a half. This article is part of her ongoing integration of different aspects of her life: teacher, dancer, scientist, feminist,
parent person.
48 CQICI Sourcebook Volume4 1978-79
Volume 5
1979-80
Editor Note
WHERE YOU GOIN' WITH THAT GUN I Setting Our Sights
"A writeris no
who bas sometbing to
ho bas found a process that w
ld not have thought of if be ha
be is someone
· g about new things
started to say them."
illiam Stafford
bloc , that shot ope
ment, all headed in th
hand, they race towards e next runner who, tracking his
one running body to then xt can occur seamlessly. Togeth
The daily jogger, on t other hand, is focused more on
breath, the beat of heart, thetweep of momentum, the impa
though s/he has to cover groun to get there. Though it is th
irection must nevertheless be osen in order to proceed.
For a long time it appearedthat Contact Improvisation ore concerned with sensat n than achievement and . There is the sense in racticing Contact tha · 'right'. Anything go s. Yet there is a li ollection of expe ences one coul is the poi of Con eels backed up against the running
the still figures into a blur of move-
towards the finish line. With baton in
matches stride so the passage of baton from
y are going somewhere.
rnal movement sensations: the rhythm of
earth. Wheres/he is going is not on the map-
ement and not the direction that is significant, a
activity without a goal. That we, like the joggers,
therefore feel free to choose any direction for our practice
ysical interaction that doesn't intentionally injure you or
ow broad an activity can be before it has no parameters at all and
call life, or in this case, human experience. When, in 1977, Steve
ied, "Just the pleasure of using your body is, I think, maybe the main
an unplanned and spontaneous way, where you're free to invent and they're
free to invent and you're e other-that's a very pleasant social form." However, it was by first establish-
ing priorities that Contact was able to provide its particular kind of pleasure.
Contact can be seen as a means for communicating through physical contact. Dialogue proceeds, using the exchange of
weight between partners to tune them to the physical forces that effect their motion and to tune them to each other. At the
outset of Contact Improvisation, a choice was made to minimize the social content of the contact and to work, initially, with
the physical elements involved in the exchange. Stated or by example implied, this choice along with others brought depth
to the practice of Contact by limiting its scope. By narrowing the focus of the activity, subtle information was made visible:
the experience of gravity; the "small dance" of the skeleton balancing erect; the flow of weight through the body as it rolls
across the floor; the exchange of weight between partners during lifting, throwing and catching; the sensation of sharing a
dynamic center of balance with another mover.
It has been 8 years since the decision to work with these specific physical elements. In this time, practice has
revealed many principles that, serving as anchors, allowed the scope of partner exchange to widen. The practice of CI
continues to suggest ways in which its principles and skills can be applied. Following these suggestions leads to fas-
cinating work in dance, theatre, therapy and education. As the concern with physical contact and weight ex-
change becomes less of a focus in their work, many Contactors wonder whether they are still doing "Con-
tact Improvisation". Others continue their studies regardless, not caring one way or the other what it is
called.
Contact, as an evolving system, tends to attract the forces that work to open what is fixed, change
what is static. Ever since its formation as the Contact Newsletter in 1975, Contact Quarterly has
reflected this eagerness to find relevance in a broad range of sources. In considering the direc-
tion of our interests, as editors we ask ourselves, 'What does shooting guns have to do with
Contact Improvisation?' In shooting, one tests the accuracy with which a message
of energy (power) can be delivered to a distant point (moving or still). As a
'vehicle for moving ideas', Contact Quarterly shares that aim.
Nancy Stark Smith
Volume 5 1979-80 CQ/CI Sourcebook
"There is a bit of insanity in dancing that
does everybody a great deal of good."
Edward Denby
Letters
Editor
Note
When I first started falling by choice, I noticed a blind spot.
Somewhere after the beginning and before the end of the fall, there was
darkness. And then the floor. Luckily, there were mats at first. Soon
I learned that the end of the fall was the beginning of another move,
usually a roll. That gave me somewhere to go. So I rolled. At the end
of that roll was another roll, and at the end of that, another. Then, I
noticed another blind spot. Somewhere after the beginning and before
the end of the roll, there was darkness. In that darkness, however, I
noticed a body moving, a body that knew just where to go.
The blind spot in the fall is the moment when the fall and the
faller lose synch. The faller falls asleep and her body falls without guid-
ance to the floor. Truly lost in space. Ever fall asleep at the wheel?
You 're so tired your eyelids stick together each time you blink ·until
they pop wide open as you realize you've just been driving 60 mph on
the highway with your eyes closed, for how long? The same sensation
occurs while falling. You wake up shortly before reaching the floor,
just in time to hastily steer yourself to safety. Adrenalin makes your
hair stand up.
The more I fell, the more familiar the sensation of dropping
through space became, the less disoriented I was during the fall. Staying
awake from the first moment of balance-loss, I found that falling was
in itself a dynamic balance. One in which the forces at play-gravity,
momentum and mass-were all operating in their natural order and if
my mind was with me I could gently guide that fall toward a smooth
landing. Confidence came with experience and soon enjoyment took
the place of fear and disorientation. In the course of a Contact Improv-
isation duet, I found myself taking every possible option to fall. I
would slip out unexpectedly from under my partner just to take the
ride: head first, feet first, horizontally, diagonally; falling became
irresistible.
It has become clear; there is no where we can stay put. Even
standing, we execute a continuous fall. The expression, 'fall from grace,'
becomes an impossible statement when falling is itself experienced as
a state of grace. This is not to say that disorientation, confusion and
dis-ease have no place in the geometry of balance. They, in fact, stim-
ulate the balancing mechanism. Stimulate us to ask questions: what is
dis-ease, what does healthy mean, how do we recognize and maintain
it? How can we stay awake during the fall; this is the healing issue.
Nancy Stark Smith
Fall 1979
CONTACT & HEALING
Just saw the Winter '79 issue of
CQ and it looks really good! I see
that the next issue is on healing ...
a very important topic on many
levels ... If anything comes out of
the discussion it will be an awareness
of the connectedness of all things,
and an affirmation of Contact as a
connector.
If I may ramble on a bit longer
and share some insights and a view-
point ... It seems the pop'lllar notion
of 'health' today is a state of 'not
being sick'. Healthy, however, means
'to be whole'' and is linked to the
words "holy" and "beauty" (the
Greek word for health is "koilo"
meaning beautiful). An unhealthy
person is damaged, not whole. A
holy person is a whole being. So,
the meaning of health expands be-
yond the physical aspect. Being
healthy involves the dynamic integra-
tion of body, mind and soul in a pro-
cess of creative self-expression ... we
are healthy to the degree that we are
manifesting our possibilities.
Our culture seems to be overly ra-
tional and intellectual-separating
mind and body. I know, for example,
that most architects live in their
heads and experience with their eyes.
They're very tight and far from spon-
tant0us (if I may generalize that
grossly). Contact Improvisation en-
courages integration within the self.
50 CQICI Sourcebook
Volume 5 1979-80
It asks for looseness, openness and re-
sponsiveness ... as well as .a sensitivity
to one's own needs and those of
others ... making one like moldable
clay-impressionable, sensitive, tan-
gible ... pulled, thrown, melted, so-
lidified, broken and pulled together-
so much physical activity that one
cannot help but change on the emo-
tional, mental, and spiritual levels as
well. With this awareness we can en-
courage a healthy cross-linking of all
the levels ... toward a wholeness of
b.eing ... The environment surround-
ing us can be a 'stage for life' ... sup-
porting 'wholeness'. A healthy en-
vironment nurtures healthy people;
healthy people build healthy environ-
men ts.
With this spirit,
Namaste!
Ross Chapin
Mpls, Minnesota
Dear Contact Quarterly,
Coming from a background of
psychology and movement therapy,
I am intrigued by the similarities be-
tween what I have experienced in
Contact Improvisation and my exper-
ience in psychological therapies. The
following is a brief synopsis of the
psychological theories I have looked
at in this way.
Gestalt Therapy-focuses on "being
in the now." By paying attention to
our inner needs in each moment, we
relinquish the avoidances in our lives
and commit ourselves to confronting,
and living in the present.
Jungian Approach to Therapy-
based on Carl Jung's belief in the ex-
istence of the feminine and masculine
in each of us regardless of our gender.
The essence of the work in Jungian
therapy is to balance out, and come
to a resolution of the imbalanced or
conflicted opposites within us.
Various theories of Group Dyna-
mics-predictable behavior patterns
inherent in the development of a
group which evolve out of the unfold-
ing of contact and intimacy amongst
the members of a group.
Theme of rejection-a common de-
nominator to most therapies. Based
on denial of a human being's primary
need for love and acceptance, usually
going back to one's early relation-
ship with parents. The building of
trusting and honest relationships is
a key factor in any mode of therapy
to help counteract feelings of un-
worthiness, and the fear of rejection.
Some thoughts: I am wondering
if more attention should be paid to
Volume 5 1979-80
Contact Improvisation as a healing
art by bringing psychological con-
sciousness to Contact classes, jams,
and workshops? And if so, how do
we do this? (Also, has it been, or is
it presently being done by anyone?)
Will doing this change Contact Im-
provisation from an educational to a
psychological process, and if so, do
we want to do this?
So, to sum up, can (and how can)
an exploration of psychological
theories and techniques shed some
light on to the psychological frame-
work within Contact Improvisation
in order to open up greater potenti-
ality for the teaching and dancing
experience of Contact Improvisation?
Would love to have an exchange
of ideas on this by contacters who
have experience and expertise within
the field of psychology.
Toward growth and wholeness,
Deborah Goldberg
Greenfield, Mass.
MORE INFORMATION
Dear C.Q.:
I enjoyed Beth Goren's article,
"The Anatomy of Man and Woman"
in the last issue of C. Q. [Vol. IV
No. 314]. It provided me with a new
way of perceiving the relationship of
femur to pelvis and doubtless will be
of direct use in my continuing quest
for better alignment. I would, how-
ever, like greater clarification of the
following statements: "When the
legs and feet take a parallel stand,
the neck and head of the femur direct
energy upwards into the socket in a
back to front orientation. This is the
sense that I find to be most lacking
in Contacters and what.we most need
to develop." There's not enough in-
formation here. I don't understand
clearly how this orientation applies
to actual movement, especially Con-
tact. So at the point of application,
I'm somewhat confused. An example
might clarify things. What would hap-
pen under actual conditions of move-
ment, if supported or if not? That's
all. Thanks.
Peter Ryan
Vancouver, B.C.
Dear Peter: We were able to contact
Beth by phone and interpret a brief
answer to your question. She reiter-
ated her observation of a basic lack of
buttock-sacrum-coccyx support in
people doing Contact Improvisation.
She speculated that images designed
to facilitate a release of tension or
'give way' in the lower back (e.g.
'dropping the tail') could cause a men-
tal and physical lack of support; that
'release' is an important first step in
changing habits; and that once 're-
leased' one must create a new sense
of support. As Contact Improvisation
makes special demands on the body
to be a supporting structure, a proper
image for support is essential. In a
parallel stance, you can experience a
sensation of support by placing the
thumbs in the back of the greater tro-
chanter with the fingers wrapped a-
round the front of the pelvis and pres-
sing the thumbs upward, inward and
forward. This action will direct the
support from the leg up into the thigh
socket and give the sacrum a lift. Not
only will you sense the weight flowing
down through the bones but will also
sense a counterforce travelling up the
leg and into the pelvis. Once you've
identified this sensation, you can work
with it as you move, supporting your
own weight and who's-have-you. For
more information we suggest you
write to Beth directly at 339 E 6th St.
Apt B, NYC 10003. [Eds.}
CQ/CI Sourcebook 51
A DEFINITION Round Up
CONTACT IMPROVISATION is an evolving system of movement based on the communication between
two moving bodies and their combined relationship to the physical laws that govern their motion-gravity,
momentum, inertia. The body, in order to open to these sensations, must learn to release excess muscular
tension and abandon a certain quality of willfulness to experience the natural flow of movement. Practice
includes rolling, falling, being upside down, supporting and giving weight to a partner. Alertness is developed
in order to work in an energetic state of physical disorientation, trusting in one's basic survival instincts. It
is a free play with balance, self-correcting the wrong moves and reinforcing the right ones, bringing forth a
physical/emotional truth about a shared moment of movement that leaves the participants informed, centered,
and enlivened.
52 CQ;CI Saurcebook Volume 5 1979-80
Round Up
In Contact Improvisation we fall alone and together. By blending the weight of two bodies through a shifting
point of physical contact a shared center of gravity is established. Around tbis center partners ride weight along com-
mon paths of momentum. Releasing, folding and activating weigbt flow through the joints, opens and softens partici-
pants to each other and the floor. fo this softened and receptive state we ,1re able to adapt quickly and quietly to tbe
most charged of falling encounters.
Stephen Petronio
Volume 5 1979-80 CQICI Sourcebook
Round Up_
-Contact Improvisation in perspective-
A DEFINITION
CONTACT IMPROVISATION is a
movement form, improvisational by
nature, involving two bodies in contact.
Impulses, weight and momentum are
communicated through a point of
physical contact that continually rolls
across and around the bodies of the
dancers ... Like bolos, fluid and eccen-
trically weighted, the dancing bodies
swing, bounce, roll, and fly through
and with a common center.
Curt Siddall [1975]
54 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volwne 5 1979-80
The Educational Value of Contact Improvisation
for the
College Student
by Daniel Lepkoff
This statement was submitted to
tbe Educational Policies Committee
of Hampshire College, Amherst, Mass.
on November 29, 1979.
Contact improvisation is a move-
ment technique. Though much young-
er than ballet or modern dance, it
proves to be as rich and dee~. It ei_n-
bodies a progression of physical skills
which can be used to train the begin-
ner as well as challenge the virtuoso.
Students of contact improvisation
acquire access to a large realm of
movement very quickly and begm to
make significant changes in their
movement patterns, strength, and sen-
sitivity within three or four classes.
This makes the technique particularly
desirable for the theater student and
non-dancer.
The skills acquired in contact im-
provisation are by no means limited
to the form itself. A deep understand-
ing of weight, movement flow, and use
of strength greatly aid anybody who
desires to study ballet, modern dance,
or other physical disciplines. The ex-
tensive exposure to the physical and
mental states involved in improvising
and discovering movement can help
choreographers in their attempts to
gather material for their set work.
Contact improvisation directly
strengthens one's presence. Just as
one can become aware of the eyes
seeing, the ears hearing, and the skin
feeling, one can become aware of the
mind sensing. Through practice of
this dance form one becomes able to
experience and observe the state of
one's nervous system particularly
when in an intimate physical relation-
ship with another. This spawns an
element of control over one's percep-
tual reality. This control and ability
to focus is training in developing pow-
er. Personal power and strength of
presence is essential in any performing
situation as well as in daily life.
Contact improvisation nurtures a
basic physical trust between two
people and among a group. The form
demands a care and consideration of
one's partner and towards this end
seeks to develop sensitivity and con-
fidence. This trust and the freedom
which ensues kindles a rich and fertile
environment for working creatively
with another person. Knowledge and
experience of this environment aids
in any situation where people are
working together, actors on stage
doing a scene, or dancers performing
a piece.
The working relationships which
develop in this form cross the bound-
aries created by sexual roles; men
dance with men, women with women,
and men with women alike. I do not
know of anv artistic discipline in
which non-~exual, deep, and honest
physical contact is explored with_ to-
tal equality relative to sex. In this
form women lift men as often as men
lift women. Women learn to exercise
a kind of strength which often has
never been encouraged, likewise men
learn to allow themselves a soft, re-
sponsive, and non-competitive posture.
It is a revelation to both partners that
a one hundred and eighty pound man
can be easily & completely supported
by a one hundred pound woman.
Again, the trust derived from freeing
the traditional sexual roles creates a
more comfortable and fluid atmos-
phere among any group of artists
seeking to work together.
Contact improvisation seems to be
of particular value for the college age
person. College students find them-
selves in an intense period of transi-
tion. They are coming to grips with
the image and reality of themselves
as adults. Thev are intently exploring
the psychological politics of sexual
relationships. This form offers them
a grounded, simple, and clear oppor-
tunity to interact deeply and honestly
with each other. It seems to serve as
a reference point or forum for expe-
riencing oneself in relationship with
others in an unthreatening environ-
ment and without the need to formu-
late consciouslv or to talk about what
is going on. The strongest evidence
for the emotional supportive value of
this work is the very real attraction
students have for this form. They
want to experiment and expand. This
form gives them the opportunity to
go ahead.
In and of itself contact improvisa-
tion has become a significant move-
ment within the dance world, recog-
nized bv audiences and critics as a
fascinating and evocative performance
experience. Many up and coming
dancers and actors are using the skills
they've acquired through practice of
this form to advance themselves in
their artistic work. Considering its
value as a supportive discipline for
the actor studying theater or the danc-
er studying traditional techniques, as
well as its presence as a new and viable
dance form, I feel no hesitation in
recommending to any college or uni-
versity that contact improvisation be
a permanent part of the curriculum of
any program in dance or theater. ~
CQ/CI Sourcebook 55
Volume 5 1979-80
Impression Left in the Sand by a Right Handed Aikido Roll. November 1976. [Curt Siddall]
AIKIDO- INFORMATION IN DEED
by Steve Paxton
reprinted from Contact Newsletter, Vol I No 5, Summer 1976
] ack Wada (Sensei) Aikido instruc-
tor at [the University of California at
Santa Cruz] gave a demonstration
during the Contact Improvisation
workshop 19 April [1976]. Aikido
is a ] apanese Martial Art developed
early this century by M. Uyeshiba,
then a master of the extant martial
arts. Aikido has valuable information
for those who have eyes to see. Wada-
sensei did much to make the forces
visible; spirals and curves to meet the
pro-forma aggression of his 3 ukis, the
energy of easy blending, guiding, lead-
ing and directing attack energy to its
own neutered completion. Most val-
uable to me was Wada-sensei's unvary-
ing unromanticized unstressed con-
centration. Seeing him react was in-
formation in deed.
The martial arts are the arts of
war. They have each been forged in
the heat of life or death, and have
matured through a lineage of survivors.
Aikido is of particular interest due to
breadth of vision of the situation of
war. It does not stress the vs. but the
non-polar 'we'. The intense realiza-
tion which death brings to activity
has graced the martial arts including
Aikido with efficiency. This elegance
of means is based on profound (be-
cause essential) information of body
mechanics, training procedures, and
physical possibilities. Here is infor·
mation embodied in a seamless flow.
The concentration which cannot
bend. The accommodating winning
maneuver.
Contact Improvisation is not a
martial art. It is perhaps an art sport
if it is defined by the context in which
it currently operates. The means of
teaching are not those of life or death
confrontation but life to life confron-
tation. The teaching philosophy is
that of mildness, supposing that learn-
ing can be joyous, that the danger of
finding is a pleasure in depth. Con•
tact as a means has produced a com-
munity of particular information, an
'it' against which other things can be
assessed, by which 'it' 'itself' can be
gauged in living manifestation. It is
time to question: What is the result?
Is the fire hot enough to forge the
solid concentration? ls mildness
means enough to calm the seeker and
show the teacher and the student a
calm balanced center, to obliterate a
hierarchical I (invitation to war, Atlas
vs. Heracles) and to expose the We of
us and the forces? Or is it a cheap
thrill, placator, builder of influence
for those with the sweets, waste of
time spent in orgy of sensation? Com-
passionate teachers? Balanced teach-
ers? Concentrating teachers? What
will it be? The current generation is
the test animal. Contact will always
be reflected in our karma. Contact
is serene. We think we know: the
forces in play. 'It' /us are on the line.
Things are always life or death. ~
56 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 5 1979-80
Volume 5 1979-80 CQICI Sourcebook 'SJ
THE BUSINESS OF CONTACT TOURING
Ellen: We're discussing the business
of Contact-How to be a business
manager or how not to be. What are
the primary ingredients in putting on
a performance? We came up with: a
mailing list, space (size and location),
scheduling, organizing. Are you doing
it for a friend or, as Dena called it,
are you taking a cut? What kind of
expectations did you have as the or-
ganizer? Were they shared by the
performer?
Peter: I think that as a promoter you
have to maintain your integrity. The
fact is that we are part of the Contact
community that stretches from coast
to coast. There are times when peo-
ple are bringing in someone they know
only from reputation. There is a dan-
ger that you may get in over your
head. You have to be able to say,
"no" even though you want the work-
shop to happen, "I'm sorry, I can't
guarantee this amount of money or
this number of students." You must
be clear as to what you can generate
and let the artist make the decision.
Dena: Concerning integrity, there
have been inklings and rumblings of
competition for markets, like "don't
touch Oregon, it's mine." The Bay
Area Contact Network in San Fran-
cisco, initiated bv Alan Ptashek and
others [see CQ Vol IV No 3/4] is a
model we can think about in the
future to help us cooperate instead
of compete. Isn't that the philosophy
of our dance form?
Ellen: In terms of competition among
producers, the four of us mentioned
that we hadn't been "doing it" lately,
so someone else is obviously "doing
it" instead.
Dena: The first year that I sponsored
people, I did it "as a gift", to help my-
self learn and to support contact in my
community. I've grown to understand
that it is important to take a percent-
age so that you don't feel that your
energy is exploited.
Roger: I've always thought that man-
agement is just as much of an art as
the dancing.
Ellen: On the East Coast Tour in
1978, it was suggested that the man-
agers and the performers all take an
equal cut. In this instance we were
seen as equal partners.
Roger: In actual fact, this arrange··
ment never happened.
Dena: In Montr(al, we've never of-
fered a guaranteed fee to the perform-
er because we are not producers and
have no money to back the perform-
ance. On the other hand, I've worked
for the Muse"e des beaux-arts de Mon-
tr~al which can produce the perform-
ance and take the risk of losing money.
Ellen: What we're talking about is
two styles, one where you are the
manager and have all the responsibi-
lity and another where you broker
the services of an institution. Clearly
if you can broker these services it
takes the risk, time, and frustration
out of your hands to some degree. If
you're going on your own, the failure
or success is all yours. The expecta-
tion of a good performance can be
crushed totally when no one shows
up and there is no money to pay any-
body, including yourself.
58 CQ/CI Saurcelx:Jok
a conversation between Peter
Ryan, Dena Davida, Ellen
Nayduch and Roger Neece
at Current Exchange 1979
Peter: Dena's letter in the Contact
Quarterly last year requested that
people not take it for granted that if
they gCJ on tour they're going to be
able to get sponsors in each city.
Again, if you are planning a tour,
please be sensitive and respect the
people who live there; they rely on
their community for their livelihood.
So, if you come in as a high profile
performer you are going to milk the
market. If you are on the road a lot
or want to be on the road a lot, con-
sider the fact that we are a limited
market. You are placing a great bur-
den upon your promotor to go be-
yond his/her neighborhood and dance
community to generate that extra
revenue for you.
Roger: The easiest way to organize
something is to affiliate yourself with
a local dance studio that does modern
or experimental work. You can use
their mailing list, studio, facilities,
etc. to piggyback with your own per-
sonal resources instead of taking on
all the organizing yourself. A finan-
cial guideline: if you co-sponsor with
someone (and they provide the post-
age and mailing, box office and pub-
licity) the standard split is 50150.
One situation or avenue that has been
very successful in New York City is
affiliation with galleries. The Paula
Cooper Gallery has hosted three sets
of performances, and the Holly Solo-
mon Gallery sponsored one. In some
cases they guarantee the performers
a small fee, but usually they furnish
only the space. Donations are re-
quested.
Peter: Vancouver is not a visual arts
center, and galleries have not been a
good alternative here. ._,.
Volume 5 1979-80
Dena: In Montr~al, we've worked
in three settings: Studio Catpoto,
universities, local studios. Luckily
we have always had our"own work
space and, given enough time, we can
free it up for a week. We usually get
it for a bargain price since we are the
major renters, say 100 dollars for the
week (and free classes for our land-
lords). Concordia University recently
hired Andrew Harwood to teach, and
Universit€ de Qufbec hired me-and
paid us on guest teacher salaries. Oc-
casionally Studio Nouvelle Aire has
co-sponsored someone with us.
Peter: If you can do it, get an insti-
tution to back you. Look for the
museums, the community colleges,
libraries, churches, public buildings
with downtown plazas, art councils.
Roger: It is also important to know
your local area and what can and
can't be done there. It's one thing
to organize a workshop for ten peo-
ple with a teacher who is your friend;
it's another thing to plan a series of
workshops, two or three performances
and guarantee a fee of $500. You
have to know beforehand what you're
going to be able to handle.
Dena: Getting very practical, I think
about all the expenses. There's the
airfare, fee for the space, poster de-
sign and printing, office supplies, post-
age, telephone, housing and food (in
Montreal we usually bed and board
the artist with us). Sometimes there
are additional costs such as video,
lighting equipment, tech personnel.
Ellen: Listening to Dena's list of ex-
penses and how they are or are not
paid for, I would describe this process
as "grass roots". If one looks at the
actual costs to produce a concert, it
can be quite expensive. It seems that
in the Contact community we are re-
lying much more on volunteer human
resources, than financial resources.
Dena: I find we're designing a new
business context. I've also been in-
volved with the National Endowment
for the Arts touring program, and I
see that contacters are working on a
totally different basis (day to day sur-
vival, maybe?)
Peter: In the winter of 1978, I spon-
sored Beth Goren and Danny Lepkoff.
The workshops were each a week long
and the fee was $ 50. There were 10
to 15 people per workshop so there
was a healthy amount of money. The
costs were not that great because air-
fare was not included.
Ellen: So out of this gross income of
$500 how much money did you make
and how much time did you put in?
Peter: I put in a lot of time, I did a
lot of groundwork and I haven't even
thought about the percentage. I had
a separate bank account for all money
I made as a sponsor and did not break
it down for each individual project,
but I probably made about$ 75 for
each, about 20%.
Ellen: One question that comes up in
terms of percentages is the amount
you take as the manager. I've also
taken from 10 to 20 percent, depend-
ing on my experience at the time.
Dena: The workshop classes have been
the real money-making part of each
residency. The performances have
brought in a minor amount in every
case.
Ellen: Production costs are usually
high compared to performance revenue.
Whereas in a workshop, the overhead
is low, the fees are high for the parti-
cipants, and you're paying only one
or two teachers.
Dena: The cost is infinitely greater
for five people. It's much easier to
do a successful duet tour.
Roger: One of the biggest problems
has been finding a suitable space
(large enough and with resilient floors),
and then having to pay $ 5 or $10 an
hour for many hours of classes.
Peter: Sometimes it's difficult to
negotiate a reasonable fee for a week
of classes. In Vancouver, I've rented
the Western Front and made arrange-
ments to cover the cost of the space.
I included that in the fee for the work-
shops. We don't work on a percentage
basis either.
Dena: In Montreal, we've always
offered a flat rate for space, not by
the hour or by a percentage.
Ellen: Another thing you might con-
sider, especially if you are in a learn-
ing phase, is bartering. Maybe you
want to take the workshops for free
in exchange for your services. Be clear
from the beginning with yourself and
the performer that that's all you want
out of it. I think you'll find the
amount of time it takes to produce a
residency is much greater than you
ever think it is.
Dena: At Catpoto, we four (now
six) help each other plan residencies,
though one person takes the major
responsibility (we alternate). We have
a video person, and we all translate
into French, in exchange for taking
the classes.
Ellen: Keep a clear, accurate record
of expenses and make out a projected
budget of income and expenses. And
contracts. I highly recommend con-
tracts even if you are promoting a
friend. It's good business to make
out a contract signed by both parties
stating the exact requirements. It's
not something you write up when the
person arrives, it's something you agree
on beforehand.
Roger: Before you begin, it's also a
good idea to talk with your local
dance studios and find out what their
experience has been in sponsoring
other artists. You may get some idea
Volume 5 1979-80
CQ/CI Sourcebook
of how receptive the non-contact com-
munity might be.
Dena: Know your community and
find out the schedule of other arts
organizations (even a psychology
convention could conflict). Don't
overlap with other important events.
Ellen: Time is another consideration.
You need to accommodate both day
and evening workers. Planning during
college vacations is not a good idea.
But no matter what schedule you
make, someone is going to be unavail-
able or disappointed. Also, think
about the location of the space. If
transportation is not good or the loca-
heard of him. People were totally
going on my say-so that this was going
to be a good class.
Peter: Essentially, the issue you are
raising is that of selling the person.
Some people do not have to be sold,
their names are already commodities.
Dena: Montreal is different because
the commodity in the workshops I
have sponsored has been Contact
Improvisation itself, not the reputa-
tion of the teacher. The large T'ai
Chi community and those interested
in dance improvisation always come.
Roger: Boston and New York City
that's of vital interest to a lot of peo-
ple in general, so with that in mind I
put out information to the dance com-
munity, to doctors, to the athletic
community, and to special interest
groups. It's also a good idea to contact
people in neighboring cities so you
don't have to generate the whole mar-
ket from your one area. You can col-
laborate in terms of a series of work-
shops or one big wor:kshop for several
cities.
Ellen: It also cuts transportation costs
for teachers.
Dena: In one case a "special interest"
group saved us from a disaster when
"'
~
..c
u
0
0
..c
0.
tion is not safe, people who might be
interested in the work may not come.
A high profile place attracts more
students/audiences. How much do
people in your area know contact and
the particular person you are spon-
soring? When Steve Paxton came to
Boston there was a real interest not
only from Contact people but from
people who were interested in dance
in general. Whereas, when Andrew
Harwood came, although I knew he
was a great teacher, no one had ever
are much different. The Contact
community is very small relative to
the dance community. So for the
sponsor it's really a matter of reaching
out to the public and selling the
teacher.
Peter: You have to go beyond the
Contact people to those not regularly
engaged. For example, when Beth
Goren came, she did a workshop called
"Balancing the Body/Mind". Now
Andrew Harwood and Mangrove \vere
following on each other's tails. What
we thought of, with Mangrove in town
for only three days, was to have them
teach a men's class and tap the gay and
"masculinist" communitv. The Gav
Rights Association beca~e an enth~siastic
co-sponsor. Those were the
largest workshops we've ever had.
We've relied mainlv on word-of-mouth
among the dancer~. other fringe art-
ists, psychologists, and friends of
friends of friends. Limited postering
!n certain cafes ...
60 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 5 1979-80
Peter: ~\y experience is that word-of-
mouth is not sufficient. In most urban
areas there is a glut of posters. So if
you're going to compete with what
else is going on you have to be very
selective. Phone calls are a good thing
if you have the time (D: and patience).
Also, getting to the media and selling
the person: "Look, we have this per-
son coming to town." Send the in-
formation-who the person is, what
they have <lone, what they are going
to offer and whv it would be interest-
ing to have the~ on the air to talk,
public service announcements on TV,
etc, are useful as well. If the media
are tough, I'd really suggest cultivating
friends. That means finding out who
those people are, letting them know
who you are and why you are a good
person to know.
Dena: I've gotten to know one local
reviewer, Angele Dagenais, who I find
very open-minded and articulate. She
wrote one article on Contact the first
year I came to the city and people
still call us about it. We give it out as
the French introduction to the form.
One article can have a great deal of
influence.
Ellen: That brings us to deadlines.
How much planning time you have
ahead of the performance or work-
shop is very important to a good pub-
licity campaign. You need to get to-
gether a press packet including a press
release, any material (resume, reviews)
you have from the artist, and photos.
You'll find nine times out of ten that
if you have a good action photo with
sharp contrast, you '11 get your article
published, or at least a photo and a
caption. Find out the deadlines for
those free public listings and service
announcements. I relv on free adver-
tising, and have used few paid ads,
(though they can be invaluable if you
have the budget.)
Roger: There are· two problems that
can't be predicted. One is the failure
of your publicity campaign. You may
send out press releases and no paper
will list them. The second is the
weather ...
Dena: ... and other natural cycles.
It seems to be everyone's experience
that the enthusiasm within the Con-
tact community has upswings and
downswings. Sometimes they're hard
to predict.
Ellen: How can you draw a new
Volume 5 1979-80
Contact aumence and not be so de-
pendent on the same people to sup-
port you each time? I think you
have to consider who else is in town
at the same time. The timing may
be great for you, but if Pilobolus is
there that night and that's where
your audience is going, it could be a
disaster.
Dena: At least three weeks before
the event, get your announcements
in the mail.
Ellen: Build an effective mailing list
from the community where you know
the interest exists. For ir1stance, using
the list of a ballet company would ob-
viously not work (it's quite huge and
too time-consuming to sort out). Re-
member, bulk mailing is a real money
saver. You need 200 pieces in the
U.S. Find a non-profit organization
whose bulk mailing permit you can
borrow, and mail out 200 no matter
wh<!t
Dena: At Catpoto, we collected an
excellent list of highly interested
folks from our own students, the
guest list from performances we gave,
and everyone who calls. Each year
we sit down and comb out the "dead"
cards.
Peter: Why doesn't a workshop or
performance go? The responsibility
is on the sponsor to be shrewd enough
and astute about who is going to
come and whether vou can attract
people from a dista"nce. Why not
include in the Quarterly a list of in-
dividuals and groups who are available
for touring that people could write
to?
Dena: I've found that collaborative
ventures are the clearest way to avoid
potential time and place collisions.
·~
CQ/CI Sourcebook 61
Beyond the
Rambling Rolling Rut
by Kris Wheeler
The following is a collection of
scores designed to encourage range
and skill with creative process while
involved in contact improvisation.
Creative process is the essence of im-
provisational artistry. It taps the in-
tuition and is therefore able to em-
brace great quantities of information,
and to perceive simultanegusly pat-
terns and relationships of many
dimensions-rhythm, poetry, design,
imagery ...
Dancers, especially those with no
other movement training than contact
improvisation, seem to limit their
movement material and restrict their
contact dance to a narrow range of
possibilities. Rather than shut out
the reception of info~ation we can
allow our intuition to absorb and play
with choices of a wide variety of di-
mensions.
When first becoming aware of and
expanding the range of our moment
to moment choices, we can find our-
selves intellectually deciding the ·
future. This interferes with the intui-
tive choice process. Let it be a phase
to pass through and emerge with more
awareness and greater participation
with the totality of the moment.
The Content of the Dance, the
Emerging Elements
Two people beginning in physical
contact, dance. (Later they can be-
gin out of contact.) When either one
notices an emerging idea, it is an-
nounced and both explore it as the
source of their dance. It needn't take
longer than one minute to announce
an idea and it can be anything from
the specific to the abstract, (e.g. slow,
in and out of contact, balancing, bub-
bling, I support as you fly, "Rock a
bye Baby," spinning ... ). The dance
should be at least a five minute ex-
ploration of the idea. If the other
dancer doesn't understand what was
said, or doesn't see how it fits, that
person says, "I don't get it" and the
dance continues until another idea
is announced. This is to keep from
trying to recreate what is already in
the past.
and the circle can announce what is
perceived as the movement idea to be
used as a source. Each time a new
dancer joins a new idea is announced.
(It is interesting to hear the circle's
observation of your movement.) With
time, more depth and subtlety will
develop in observation and vocabu•
lary-at about this stage dancers are
quick to perceive the potential of
their movement material and the an-
nouncement will be superfluous.
Stillness: to Clear the Space and
Frame the Dance, or Beginning and
Ending
First work with short solos-1 to 3
seconds in length! Clearly establish
both the beginning and the ending.
Ask for feedback from observers
about their perceptions of exactly
when ~d with which part of the body
the dance began and ended.
Two people work together, starting
out of contact, finding their own indi-
vidual beginning, spending some time
in physical contact and then finding
their own individual ending with what-
ever seems appropriate. It is impor-
tant to recognize and stay committed
to the ending moment. Eventually
the dancers become more perceptive
of each other and their interface so
that the dance seems to determine
the beginning and ending.
The Line
The part of the dance between the
beginning and the ending can be
thought of as the line. The line repre-
sents the flow of the dance; anything
from the sometimes local develop- •
ment of an idea to a series of chaotic
and random events. Some improvisa-
tional lines work and some don't (and
some work for some people and not
for others). The point is to be aware
of the line, or the flow of the dance,
in order to more fully participate in
it.
In a round robin, both the dancers
In groups of 3, two dance and one
watches. A short dance at first, 2 to
S minutes with clear beginning and
ending. Eventually work toward much
longer dances that hold together as
a whole. After each dance spend some
time with feedback and discussion.
How did it hang together? Did it end
too soon, chopping off the line? Did
it ramble and not utilize the opportu-
nities? ...
Uniqueness of each Dancer
After dancers have grown more
sensitive to their partner, their sen-
sitivity can be interwoven with their
own unique creative process: Two
dancers start individually-simulta-
neous solos, time to gain a sense of
their own dance; at some point they
come into contact and work with
maintaining their own individual line
as well as creating the duet. Eventu-
ally they leave physical contact to
find an individual ending. ~
62 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Volwne 5 1979-80
DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS IN CONTACT
by Keriac
Until I wrote this article, I hadn't
realized how many different directions
I've gone with Contact in the past
year. All of these experiences are
united by one personal goal: I'd like
to contribute to the development of
Contact as a folk art, a meaningful art
activity which ordinary people do for
pure enjoyment in the normal course
of their lives. I wantto be a dance
teacher/performer within a community
of people who may have chosen not to
dance full-time, but still retain a sense
of the dancer in themselves. I've been
reaching out to people who might not
otherwise think of getting into Con-
tact dancing, even if they should have
heard of it. I've been contacting:
with Seniors ...
I did a Contact workshop with
SAGE, a senior citizens group in
Oakland, California. When I arrived
I was pleasantly surprised to find all
the senior citizens and social workers
lying on the floor of a plushly car-
peted living room, each with their
head on someone else's belly, laughing
hysterically. Naturally, I immediately
joined the fun.
As I led the group through contact
exercises, I noticed a nervousness in
myself. I feared being out of touch
with the stamina and flexibility of
older bodies and the degree of risk
appropriate to older people. The pos-
sibility of injuries floated up into my
mind. However, this group responded
to the same exercises that I use in my
regular classes with only slight modi-
fication, and I soon felt at ease. I
stayed primarily with exercises that
did not take the participant very far
off center, but by the end of the ses-
sion, we had even gotten into weight
taking, and the only person who had
dropped out was an 83 year old wo-
man who had recently broken her
ankle.
As the two hour session was com-
ing to an end, I found myself doing
active-passive duets (I was the active
one) with one person after another.
Everyone around me began claiming,
"I'm next!" "I'm next!" It was fun.
Every single person danced a duet
with me, even the woman with the
broken ankle. These older men and
women let me balance them in the
air on my hip or back without clutch-
ing or showing any signs of fear. They
melted into the floor and took my
weight with just the right amount of
active-passive involvement. I was a-
mazed-we were really doing contact!
At our final hug, everyone was in-
credibly high, including myself-des-
pite my sweaty exhaustion. As I left,
I overheard them saying that they
wished the experience had been video-
taped so that I could be shown at an
upcoming Senior's conference in the
Midwest. Gray power is powerful!
with the Blind ...
I also taught a series of classes at
the Lighthouse for the Blind this last
year. There were six students, some
were senior citizens. Within this par-
ticular group of blind people, there
were multiple handicaps. Some were
mentally retarded or psychologically
disoriented, some had excessively
tense, rigid bodies, one was obese, one
had a fractured collar bone from a re-
cent fall, others had arthritis, diabetes
and other conditions which made them
short of breath or easily dizzied.
I altered my class goals, deciding to
use contact as a movement therapy
tool rather than as an end in itself.
We spent about an hour on warm-up
and relaxation, then spent the last
hour on contact exercises. Since I
couldn't just say "Do it like this" and
then visually demonstrate the activity,
I was forced to describe many sensa-
tions that I experience in Contact with
precise language. This was a major
challenge for me and I learned a lot
about Contact in the process.
Using Contact experiences to im-
prove the student's real-life function-
ing increased my awareness of how
really beneficial and healing Contact
is. I feel incredibly enriched by the
luxury of my present Contactor's life-
style which includes so much touching,
trusting, and ease of movement.
Since classes at the Lighthouse have
come to an end, one of the visually dis-
abled students (without other impair-
ments) is now attending my regular
class where he is much in demand as
a Contact partner among the other
students. ~
Volume 5 1979-80
CQICI Sourcebook 63
with Therapists ...
Teaching workshops for therapists
with my sister, Ilene Dillon,-who is a
therapist with a private practice in
Marin County, has also increased my
vocabulary and awareness of Contact
as a therapeutic tool. Ilene immedi-
ately recognizes principles of assertion
at work in the dynamics of Contact
interplay. Her theories on manipula-
tion are amply illustrated in what
makes a Contact duet work or not
work. It seems that the same laws
which are operating on a physical
level in Contact activities are also op-
erating on a psychological level in re-
lationships. Vocabulary used to de-
scribe emotional realities has a very
strong impact when one senses that
it is also true on a literal level when
one dances Contact, and vice versa.
Bruce Dodson, a member of the
"Issues in Radical Therapy" news-
paper collective, and I co-led a Con-
tact session at the Radical Psychiatry
Summer Institute at Fort Mason this
year. Here the language and emphasis
differed slightly from Ilene's, but it
seemed that Contact also fit in well
with the Radical Psychiatry point of
view. I found it easy to communicate
the notion of giving body surface to
case a falling person's descent (rather
than grab them to try to keep them
from harm) to people who were al-
ready familiar with the concepts of
the "rescuer-victim-persecutor" tri-
angle (when a person tries to 'help'
someone by 'taking care' of them,
they create a victim who will later
resent"-persecute] them for it.) In
other words, the person with the prob-
lem should have control of solving it.
My communal family and I attend-
ed the Summer Institute together. We
have started using Radical Psychiatry
techniques in our emotional sharing
meetings and our personal lives. It
has helped us achieve more intimacy
as a group, and a better clarity in re-
solving conflicts. It feels good to sense
the harmony between the principles
used in my family and emotional life
and in my dancing.
with Communes ...
The Communal Grapevine, (a net-
work of communes in the S.F. East
Bay) invited me to lead a Contact ses-
sion at their monthly potluck gather-
ing. Over 40 communal houses belong
to the network.
It seemed like all 40 of the house-
holds were in attendance. The very
large living room of the host commune
was filled to the brim with people
64 CQ/CI Sourcebook
ready to experience their first Contact
session, and beyond their heads I could
see many others pouring in the front
door. This was a greatly diverse group,
ranging from early teens to seniors,
and encompassing a wide variety of
lifestyles. For some, it was clear that
Contact teetered on the edge of what
was sane and/or respectable behavior.
But an "I'll try anything once" atti-
tude prevailed.
About a quarter of the group was
still dancing two hours later after
hungrier companions drifted off to
sample the temptations of the pot
luck. By then we were involved in
pretty athletic movement and the de-
crease in density gave us room to move
safely. At the end, the diners and dan-
cers re-grouped and discussed values of
interdependent, cooperative, trusting,
and responsible interaction held in
common by Contact Improvisation
and communal living.
Several communal houses invited
me to come to their regular house
meetings to lead their family in an
evening of Contact sharing. I accepted.
For some houses, this meant the first
breaking of an unspoken taboo against
physical contact among the house
members, and caused a mixture of an-
ticipatory excitement and apprehen-
sion. So far I have not heard of any
resulting orgies fulfilling anybody's
worst (or best?) fears after indulging
in the communal contact sessions I
have led.
Some of the communards in the
East Bay wanted more Contact than
a one-shot family meeting. At the
time, no one was teaching Contact in
the East Bay, so I started a class which
was held at Berkeley Moving Arts and
then later at the Dwight House com-
mune. It was attended primarily by
members of three communes although
publicity eventually opened it up to
others as well.
(Historical note: I began teaching
Contact more than two years ago in
much the same series of events. First,
just a weekly sharing session with my
communal family in our living room.
Then my family began bringing their
friends, the friends brought their
friends, and soon I was putting up
posters and teaching four classes a
week in the Walkabout studio in San
Francisco.)
in Community performances ...
This summer, a small loose group
of contactors calling ourselves "Public
Works" met informally on Sundays
in Golden Gate Park and performed
outdoors for the crowds lined up wait-
ing to get into the King Tut exhibition.
I initiated this project, modeling the
structure on a street performance
group of which I was a member five
years ago. "Public Works" differed
from the earlier group in that we used
props rather than white face to pro-
voke curiosity and we did Contact
Improvisation rather than theater.
Wearing construction worker hats
and bright orange T-shirts, and sur-
rounded by our props, which included
road crew pylons and flags, plus two
sawhorses stenciled with the "Public
Works" logo over the bright orange
stripes, we evoked the image of work-
ers doing street repair. The dancing
started with high energy jumps and
lifts, and the contact duet movement
was amplified with hand-held road
crew flags. This was the most effec-
tive way we found to attract attention
and gather an audience. "Public
Works" participants agreed it was an
interesting experiment. We plan to
revise and recycle it after the rainy
season is over.
This fall, I've continued my explor-
ation of Contact as a performance
form with the advanced students in
my regular classes. ] oe Dowling,
Robin Snyder and I recently gave a
Contact demonstration and perform-
ance at the Noe Valley Public Library.
Conditions were difficult: a cold,
linoleum covered concrete floor in a
small room with low ceilings. A par-
ty with a live band was going on in
the room above us, and our space
was the only access route to the build-
ing bathrooms. However, we had a
capacity crowd of enthusiastic people
who joined us in an hour of Contact
experiences, watched our Contact per-
formance, and then eagerly partici-
pated in the question and answer
period. The physical limitations •
had not prevented us from turning
people onto Contact.
This fall, Charles Campbell and I
also did a Contact performance and
demo at the Jewish Community Cen-
ter, which included a lively question
and answer period. People in the
Bay Area are beginning to notice
the term "Contact Improvisation"
and are eager to find out what it's
all about. 'Bo
Volume 5 1979-80
Volume 6
Susan Milani and Alan Gardner
1980-81 photo: Susan Aposhyan
CONTACT IMPROVISATION is about acquainting,
adapting, balancing, centen'ng, connecting, curving,
dancing, draping, embracing, exchanging, falling,
folding, gliding, hurdling, joining, launching, lever-
aging, lifting, listening, merging, orbiting, oozing,
pivoting, rising, risking, rocking, rolling, shifting,
slipping, spinning, spiraling, supporting, tossing,
twnbling, undefining, venturing, waiting, watching
and yielding-not necessarily in that order.
-Robin Feld
Volume 6 1980-81
CQ/CI Sourcebook 65
Steve Paxton and Daniel Lepkoff
CONTACT IMPROVISATION is an
activity related to familiar duet forms
such as the embrace, wrestling, martial
arts, and the jitterbug, encompassing
the range of movement from stillness
to highly athletic. The exigencies of
the form dictate a mode of movement
which is relaxed, constantly aware
and prepared, and on-flowing. As a
basic focus, the dancers remain in
66 CQ/CI Sourcebook
photo: Stephen Petegorsky
physical touch, mutually supportive
and innovative, meditating upon the
physical laws relating to their masses:
gravity, momentum, inertia and fric-
tion. They do not strive to achieve
results, but rather, to meet the con-
stantly changing physical reality
with appropriate placement and
energy.
Volume 6 1980-81
Q &A
by Steve Paxton
"What is Contact Improvisation?"
That the question is asked reveals
either that the term is investigated by
people with no opportunity to see
performances or jams by contactors;
no recourse to social dancing, a friend-
ly wrestling match; or, as in my case,
too much exposure to the above.
When, in 1972, a group of dancers
began work on Contact Improvisation,
it was a study of the way communica-
tion was possible through touch. My
own background was mostly the Mod-
ern Dance, which may be seen as a
study by individuals in physical isola-
tion, usually within a group. In classes
of this sort one maintains a sphere of
isolation from other students to avoid
belaboring them with battements.
Crossing the floor, it is customary to
move serially, enabling the instructor
to see each student as they pass.
From this background the commu-
nication possible through touching
was, and still is, a profound experience.
Likewise the movement which resulted
from contact improvising-a non-ration-
alized, intuitive movement leading to
unforeseen phrasing, positions and
gambits-was a relief from years of
willful technical applications.
Although improvisation has long
been a sophisticated approach to
music and, more recently, to drama
in the U.S., in my background it didn't
exist. Although there were many ref-
erences to improvisation as an impor-
.tant factor in the development of mod-
ern dance (Isadora Duncan and Rudolf
Laban,) by the time I came to study,
Modern Dance seemed in a period of
codification. From the many 'main-
line' modern dancers with whom I
studied, I can recall only classes full
of rote exercises.
This state of affairs is so contrary to
the spirit of Duncan or the ideas of
Laban that one might suppose Modern
Dance had been born and died during
the first half of the 20th Century. Yet
the term 'Modern Dance' holds promise
of renewal: it seems less useful to limit ~
Volume 6 1980-81
CQ!CI Sourcebook 67
LETTER FROM STEVE PAXTON
TO THE CRITICS in England
Totnes, Devon March '80
the phrase to a particular period than
to presume that the name, phoenix-like,
can rise from the ashes and become
again applicable. In this interpretation
it becomes an umbrella for avant-garde
efforts of any sort, which is more or
less the situation I encountered.
From this perspective, basing move-
ment upon intimate communication
(rather than aesthetic dictates) was
appealing. It spoke to my body, which
had been in isolatiori for many years.
Having found the phenomena, the
next step was to select ingredients in
preparation for the extremes of move-
ment the communication could pro-
duce. Aikido, gymnastic and medita-
tion techniques were included, and
material gleaned from the contact im-
provisation itself.
It was here, I think, in the effort to
create a technical approach to insure
greater safety, that misunderstanding
of the form was born. Many folk who
are drawn to Contact Improvisation to
explore their physicality, will begin the
practice willfully, trying to 'under-
stand' and move intellectually (as is
their habit) instead of exploring wil-
lingly. For some of these students,
the techniques suggested by the teach-
er become doctrine. They 'know'
what Contact Improvisation is because
they remember the words and perform
the techniques. I believe there is no
form of dance for which this approach
will liberate the dancer. Certainly not
Contact Improvisation which is not a
form of set movement phrases but an
approach to movement in which the
student moves from the motivations
of reflex and intuition. There is a con-
tradiction in a technical approach to
improvisation. While one is aiming for
a freedom from rationalized movement,
one is still studying movement from the
example and words of a teacher.
Ideally, each student would move at
their own rate, developing physical
skills appropriate to their own improvi-
sational explorations. However, in the
case of willful technique, a teacher
might retard the evolution of the class
For Your Information
Dear {Critic],
Confusion was evident in some re-
views of improvisational performances
I did with David Moss at ICA and Lisa
Nelson at Riverside. This confusion
arose in characterizing these works as
Contact Improvisation, which they
were not.
The term 'Con tact Improvisation'
bas bad currency in England recently
though there bas been no consistent
professional exposure of this form
given here: I have taught beginning
levels at Dartirtgton College of Arts
~
PART, a dance by Lisa Nelson and Steve Paxton
with the music 'Private Parts' by Robert Ashley
photo: Fabrizio Garghetti
68 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 6 1980-81
and at X-6, where Lisa Nelson and
Nancy Stark Smith have also taught
weekend workshops. Additionally,
Ms. Smith gave a lecture demonstra-
tion with Laurie Booth at Dance Um-
brella's Conference on Dance Artists
in Education (Nov 30-Dec 2, 1979).
There have been no performances
given by American practitioners who
have been developing the form for the
past eight years. In short, experience
of Contact Improvisation in England
is incomplete.
I hope the questions of definition
and rigor of the form can be addressed
next season. Freelance Dance may be
invited to this country for extended
workshops and performances. This
is a company of men and women in-
strumental in developing Contact Im-
provisation and adept in its practice.
Meanwhile I recommend the Con-
tact Quarterly as a source of informa-
tion about the farm.
CRITIC'S RESPONSE:
LETTER FROM ANN NUGENT of
Stage and Television Today TO
STEVE PAXTON
March '80
Dear Steve Paxton,
Thank you for your circular letter,
which I was very glad to receive. I am
sorry if I was one of the offenders in
my definition of your work, and I
would indeed welcome the chance to
discuss it with you.
It was certainly my impression that
what you were doing at Riverside in
particular was 'Con tact Improvisation',
especially since there was an article on
the notice board there which seemed
relevant to what we had seen and
which went into clear detail about
your method. But in any event I
found myself unable to read fully into
what you and others were doing, and
I kept on wishing that the Dance Um-
brella had allowed time for sessions of
informal discussion so that we could
all share in closer understanding of
some of the work. Obviously if one
sees a two-hour performance of work
that has taken say a decade to evolve
the results may not be fully evaluated,
and it helps to have a working know-
ledge of some of the guidelines that
have been worked out . ..
I hope this is of some use to you.
I'd be happy to answer any further
questions.
Volume 6 1980-81
so that fundamentals of moving are the
focus, giving everybody an extended
opportunity to sink past the conscious
mind into more appropriate states. The
student is unlikely to remain 'willful'-
extracting learning on only one level
of mind-if the material is a 20 minute
concentration on rolling the body
around the floor. In the search for
further thoughts, the student's mind
becomes witness to the body and the
sensations of movement.
There are other reasons for retarding
the explorations of a class, and other
methods. Especially when taking the
first several classes with a group, I try
to gauge their perceptions and respon-
ses to simple situations. I watch for
fainters and those who look nauseous,
both common enough for people who
maintain rigidity in their bodies or
attitudes toward them. I have found
students who can't remember ever
doing a forward roll, or who become
disoriented if they roll over more than
'h roll at a time. As a teacher, these
students are especially dear to me;
their bravery in beginning to move is
more beautiful to me than most of
the throwabout expert maneuvers
expectable from 'advanced' students
of the form.
On the other hand, there are peo-
ple who will throw themselves with
astonishing abandon through the air,
onto the resources of a relative strang-
er. In abstract, the equations in
classes are fascinating. When some-
body who is flabby and insecure con-
nects with one of the devil-may-care
types, the chemistry is ... sensational.
However, the experience of these
students may not be pleasant, and
really, it should be if the learning be
of such stuff as to provoke further
exploration.
Teaching has taught me that hu-
mans operate under a wider variety
of senses and perceptions than I had
imagined, that each student has tuned
their senses differently in relation to
their experiences. One of the first
jobs is to tune the senses for the
dance at hand. I have seen willful
students straining their muscles in an
attempt to improve their dancing, but
I have yet to observe them strain their
senses. Nor would I consider this de-
sirable. The senses are tuned the way
they are for reasons of survival. New
perceptions should not be forced, but
instead, suggested or invited.
I tend to conduct classes with cau-
tion therefore, especially at first.
Stefan Szczelkun remarks that in
the videotape Chute a certain rough
and tumble attitude is seen in the
first group to work with Contact Im-
provisation. It's true that a great
many things were tried and that no
injuries resulted from the experiments.
But this was an invited group, whose
physical states and abilities were
known. And there were mats to
soften the errors. Backing up the ef-
fort was another important element;
we were doing nothing else than this
dancing for two weeks.
To recapitulate: first there was a
communicative movement form, then
there were technical developments to
implement extremes of the form.
During this period Contact Improvisa-
tion was known physically and in
common by those whose dancing de-
veloped it. We were contact improvi-
sation.
That initial work came to presenta-
tion, and those first dancers began to
teach, and to move around the coun-
try.
Christina Svane remarked that it
was like a poker player moving into
a new town ... to continue their game,
the first step is to teach it. Contact
is not a form of solitaire ...
The essence of the form is easy to
understand. It has been dont::. by wo-
men in their fifties, and one who was
8 months pregnant. It has been done
by men who were tender and other-
wise.
Technical development has been
an attempt to formulate and collate
habits of movement to further the
dance within the stream of time and
forces converging in this work. ~
CQ/CI Sourcebook
Susan Milani and Alan Gardner
70 CQ;CI Sourcebook Volume6 1980-81
Volume 6 1980-81 CQ/CI Sourcebook 71
Is Contact a Small Dance?
Mark Pritchard addressed the con-
tact community with observations,
comments and criticisms in 'New Age
Shuffleboard'. His concerns seem to
stem from a sense of passivity, self-
righ teousness and faddism, coupled
with a loss of creative integrity in the
contact community. Having built my
life, if not my lifestyle, on contact
improvisation for the last five' years,
I am interested in his perspective as
a relative newcomer. Is it indication
of a path of evolution the form has
taken? Coincidentally, the latest
Contact Quarterly has reprinted an
article Steve Paxton wrote four years
ago. In it he speaks of the mild life-
to-life confrontation of contact set
against the life-or-death urgency of
aikido: " ... is it [contact] a cheap
thrill, placator, builder of influence
for those with the sweets, waste of
time spent in orgy of sensation?"
Mark concludes in his article that
"contact risks becoming dull, at least,
and self-righteous and pretentious at
worst." Are these similar concerns?
Is it a lack of urgency which has
brought on passivity and a death of
creative outreach?
I have recently returned from
Minneapolis and the largest gathering
of contactors ever held. The Ameri-
can Dance Guild Conference was not
only a meeting ground for east/west/
central/north & south, for veteran and
neophyte, but also for contactor and
noncontact improvisor. It was a fo-
rum for witnessing, among other
things, various choices about perform-
ance: practical and philosophical. It
was a brief intersection of many diver-
gent paths; an opportunity to turn
360 degrees and gain some external
referents for the paths we are on to-
gether and alone.
So where are we? Is contact a fad-
another part of the everything natural
trend these days? Perhaps more im-
portant, is it a dead end for creativity
particularly in a performance vein?
Or as Mark asks, does it degenerate
into some other discipline, or no dis-
cipline at all?
From my recent experiences at
home and abroad I feel there is much
life in the contact community but
there are more questions than there
are answers. We seem to be at the
by Byron Brown
"They wrestle, they shove, they kick. But the rule always is, 'Bluff when you
can and don't get hurt!" [from Ranger Rick's Nature Magazine, September 1977]
" ... Where do behavioral and relational contact lead us in the
future? How do they relate to dance and choreography?"
72 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Volume 6 1980-81
u
c
cL
:J
c
"Chivalry" in rehearsal with Jiangrove members Charles Campbell, Byron
Brown and Ernie Adams
Volume 6 1980-81
end of one cycle of seven or eight
years of growth, and entering anoth-
er. The contact form has spanned
this continent many times and made
a name for itself in the dance world.
It boasts literally dozens of teachers
and performers and thousands of
practitioners. What I find particular-
ly lacking are conceptual frameworks
for what we are doing as artists and
a corresponding lack of ability to
have meaningful creative dialogue as
perf~rming artists. In this paper I
would like to share my perception of
contact improvisation as it relates to
two different performance modes:
the behavioral and the relational. In
so doing I hope I will speak to ;\lark's
concerns by stimulating continued
dynamism in this "artsport".
Contact improvisation is based on
certain principles and assumptions.
Mark Pritchard focuses on the sup-
posed contact hang-up with the term
"natural". I would like to substitute
the word "functional": contact de-
rives from functional movement. In
other words we learn to use our
bodies in necessary and efficient ways
in order to relate to our environment
and a moving partner. It is functional
to relax while falling because it takes
less energy and it causes less energy [sic]
upon impact. It is also functional to
catch oneself with the arms because
they can break a fall and not jar the
system if the wrists, elbows and shoul-
ders give with the weight. For our
purposes in dancing it is also function-
al to roll upon meeting the floor,
transferring the direction of the mo-
mentum from vertical to horizontal
in order to keep the energy moving.
To me the word "functional" helps
bypass the confusion over a nebulous
word like "natural". Being functional
as a principle of moving is integral to
contact for safety, speed and ease. In
the world of nature it is often said
that form follows function. In contact
the "natural" elegance of the pure
form could be seen in the same way:
one watches the everchanging forms
of the human body as it falls, supports,
jumps, catches, lifts and follows an-
other body. This quality of function-
al grace is shared with most sports,
and it is herein lies the connection be-
tween contact and nature. -+
CQ/CI Sourcebook 73
However, the questions of aesthe-
tics and creativity still remain. Sports
do not focus on either because the
functional goal of achieving or win-
ning remains paramount. Contact
only moves into the realm of art when
the efficiency and subtlety of physi-
cal interaction become tools for some
other process. And if it is to be a
shared art form, contact must serve
a performance process. The Dance
Guild Conference confirmed most
clearly the fact that contact improvi-
sation can emerge in several different
performance forms. I do not believe
there is a single contact aesthetic, or
even that an aesthetic is a necessary
part of doing contact.
A second principle which I find
confused in Mark's experience of the
contact community, and which is a
key to the creative leap in contact, is
personal responsibility. That is learn-
ing to take responsibility for oneself,
to take care of oneself, to be able to
respond. It is this goal on a physical
level which leads so logically into ho-
listic health and self-healing. Becom-
ing responsive means becoming aware
of one's own body, what it can do,
what it needs and how to take care of
it. Doctor/drug oriented medicine
does not generally support self-aware-
ness, self-control or personal respon-
sibility. In terms of dancing itself,
a sense of personal responsibility
means learning efficient movement
for safety and ease; and it also means
learning that one is an active partici-
pant in every movement interaction.
One cannot be passive and at the same
time able to respond without actively
choosing that particular response. Part
of the ongoing activity is to monitor
the movement input in order to guar-
antee personal safety. As the skill and
range of responsiveness expands this
part will become less and less of the
whole. Safety becomes understood
and personal responsiveness becomes
the basis for creative play. With "func-
tional" physical interaction basically
"informing" the dancing, the creative
interplay arises from mutual awareness
of weight, rhythm, momentum, en-
vironment, attitude and feeling. It is
at this level of awareness, and not the
level of functional form, that aesthetics
emerge. Sharing a physical vocabulary
74 CQ/CI Sourcebook
of contact improvisation does not
guarantee a shared aesthetic, especial-
ly performance attitude. This was
clearly demonstrated for the audience
in a duet performance which I did
with Nancy Stark Smith at the Con-
ference. Contact gave us a way to
bring together two different histories
and styles of performance-a creative
interplay. Let's now look at these
two aesthetics. I remind you that
these are my observations and may
not relate to how others define these
approaches. Especially those dancing
them.
* *
Because contact improvisation is a
process of unmediated (by thought or
socialization) human action-reaction,
it is a perfect vehicle for the observa-
tion of human and personal behavior.
This fact underlies much of Steve
Paxton's interest in contact as a per-
formance medium as he explained to
us in Minneapolis. Watching the flow
of physical attention through the re-
sponsive bodies, one sees unedited
minds in motion, unpremeditated and
unmediated by social or theatrical
forms. The dance provides us with
immediate access to the flow, each
moment significant and, in theory,
none more so than any other. With
the focus on the dance, the audience
energy serves to heighten that focus,
not draw it out. The result, as evi-
denced in the performances of Free
Lance [Danny Lepkoff, Lisa Nelson,
Steve Paxton, Nancy Stark Smith,
Christina Svane] , is not virtuoso per-
formances but dance stripped of its
artiface, the artless art. The form
points to its own meaning; we watch
the body-mind operating largely free
of conceptual discrimination.
Contact can always inform the be-
havior of those who practice it. Yet,
when performed as a "behavioral"
process it will always run the risk of
appearing dull, self-righteous and pre-
tentious to certain audiences. This is
largely a matter of signification. We
all exist and operate in worlds of pri-
ority and meaning; a multi-faceted en-
vironment takes on significance
through socialization, ambition and
habit. Contact improvisation steps
away from these into a world of pre-
cognitive, nonconceptual physical
activity: the small dance. This is
the ongoing process of awareness and
responsiveness which requires no
thought. (It puts functioning and
creativity beyond our faculty of rea-
son.) To watch the small dance is
to confront one's needs for signifi-
cance and meaning as habitually un-
derstood. If performed with integrity
it is a constant revelation of the
watcher's process of signification.
At the same time the dancing it-
self tends toward an evenness of ten-
sion and dynamic. As the signifi-
cance of action is from moment to
moment, at a distance the activity
has little meaning or shape. Are we
left with a small dance one must sit
next to in order to see? A small dance
with no meaning in the larger picture
of emotions, politics, morality and
progress? A small dance only bound
to touch a small number of people?
The paradox is there. In each of us
is the small dance with no "mean-
ing", the small dance which belies
the importance we place on mental
and social forms in our lives, the
small dance which is closest to life
and death and hardest to feel.
It is also of interest to view what I
will call the behavioral contact per-
formance from the dancer's side.
Mark's concerns are again relevant
here. For him a danger related to
this approach is the dictum to "go
with the flow of natural events, rather
than attempting to shape those events
on one's own. This viewpoint is de-
structive because it precludes creativi-
ty." What is the creative process for
the behavioral performer? Without
the dancer's traditional involvement
in dramatic, rhythmic, spatial or dy-
namic tension, wherein lies the crea-
tive act? Is contact a minimal art? A
nonexistent art? I would propose that
the creative process lies between the
behavioral process (the contact dance)
and the observant mind, both of
which lie within the dancer.
The fihe line for the dancer/artist
lies between purely experiential danc-
ing and mindful editorial directing,
between self-indulgent movement
(i.e. no care for the audience) and
performed improvisation. The disci-
pline is walking the line, and the aes-
thetic lies in that distance, that ten-
sion, that space created for witnessing
the unmediated behavioral process.
This creative tension within the
dancer is perhaps what distinguishes
behavioral contact from other disci-
plines: aikido, massage, therapy, im-
provisational dance. The loss of this
tension explains why contact so often
loses its integrity especially in per-
formance. A performer will often
gravitate towards a form which is
more actively creative on a physical
level (i.e. theatre, dance improvisa-
tion, acrobatics, slapstick comedy)
or less demanding on an attitudinal
level. When the integrity holds, be-
Volume 6 198(}.81
havioral contact is a joy to watch.
Much as one marvels at and is en-
thralled by wild animal behavior or
primitive human ceremonies, here is
added the fact that the performers
are so like us but stripped of ego and
convention as they move.
* *
Mangrove began its improvisation-
al performance process essentially in
the behavioral mode, but intentional-
ly as a group process open to sound,
solo and improvisational impulse.
Gradually the creative focus became
the transformational process within
and between us. Contact created a-
wareness, physical vocabulary and
energy exchange for our process. Yet,
perhaps more fundamentally, it estab-
lished an unmediated flow into which
we could submerge and out of which
we could emerge. Our intention was
not simply to observe the behavior
but to play with the forms that ap-
peared through the dancing: push
them, alter them, shape them, echo
them. In other words developing
awareness over time as well as in the
immediate moment and encouraging
recognition of energy forms in the
movement flow other than just kin-
esthetic. These include leader-follow-
er, mirroring, rhythmic play, gesture,
focus of attention, attitude and even
conceptual meaning. Extensions of
this have led us into vocalizing, use of
character and musical instruments.
The resulting performance form has
created a very different pattern of
meaning from the behavioral mode.
Is it contact? Are we involved in
a new discipline with a different con-
tact aesthetic? Or have we simply put
new movement skills at the service of
an old form? I was very interested to
watch a group from Washington, D.C.
performing at the Guild Conference.
Free Association did a 45 minute set
which was essentially a free-flow of
movement/theatre improvisation. I
recognized many elements of process
work; I could empathize with all the
different choices which confronted the
dancers. This company I believe is six
years old (Mangrove is five) and they
do not use contact as such. Is there
some fundamental difference in the
nature of our works and is it related
to contact? Mangrove is certainly not
closer to Free Lance than to Free As-
sociation.
Earlier I spoke of two aspects of
contact improvisation: its functional
nature and its relationship to personal
responsibility. A third aspect which
for me triangles out from the other
Volume 6 1980-81
two is the realm of communication.
This is necessary for and a result of
each of the other two; it is the basis
of relationship. Awareness of the
small dance implies the opening of
freer communication within the body.
Weight exchange implies communica-
tion between bodies dancing. Sharing
awareness of the <lance's flow in terms
of rhythm, space, dynamic and atti-
tude implies subtle communication on
a more expanded scale. By appreci-
ating this range of activity from inter-
nal to external, awareness and commu-
nication may be viewed as different
facets of energy flow.
We relate to an arbitrary boundary
of the skin surface for interacting with
others especially in contact because
we are generally aware of feeling be-
yond it. However, we see beyond it,
hear beyond it, sense air currents,
temperature, balance and tension be-
yond it. With the eyes closed and put-
ting our body image out of mind, we
build a very different picture of our
presence: it may extend from the
street noise outside to the throbbing
in the head; from the feet on the
floor to the sense of others watching.
Just as the small dance of a stand is a
dynamic balance of continual internal
movement so a dance space can be ex-
perienced as a system of constant en-
ergy flow in dynamic balance. Ener-
gy moves when a body is lifted, when
eyes shift focus, when breathing fills
one's awareness, when an onlooker
gasps.
As dancer and performer I want to
sense the energy flows, give them sub-
stance through my dancing, play with
them and transform them. I want to
communicate with an audience the re-
lational rather than isolated or fixed
nature of the world, through the inter-
play of many levels of energy, includ-
ing theirs as audience wa.ching. In
Mangrove this energy flow abstraction
is realized through the many facets of
us as human beings. We move through
space, we touch and interact, we cre-
ate vocal sound, we verbalize images,
commands, rhetoric and dialogue, we
indicate emotional energy, we creai:e
group rituals, we play and laugh at our-
selves, we take on roles and we play
music. Sometimes we are vessels for
the spirit, sometimes we are craftsmen
of the theatrical space, sometimes we
are cut off frcm others and ourselves.
For all of this contact is a bridge, a
path, a door. Its functionality helps
minimize our show, our front, our
cleverness. The sense of personal re-
sponsibility fostered has been at the
heart of our collective process and
our aesthetic mix. Communication
fuels our personal/physical relation-
ships and those with our audiences.
It is this sense of relationship (de-
scribed by one critic: "no matter how
close there was always space in be-
tween, no matter how far there was
always connection") which I feel dis-
tinguishes us from Free Association
and Free Lance; and for me it is an
aesthetic derived from contact im-
provisation. Our relational process
runs the gamut from being undisting-
uished servants of the space's energy
to insensitive manipulators of the
same. Certainly the discipline is much
harder to pin down in relational con-
tact. Mangrove deals with traditional
creative tensions: space, rhythm, fo-
cus, emotion and meaning. But as the
form is one of relational process, I see
the primary tension being between en-
ergy and form: can the everchanging
form reflect the energy in the space?
Is it contact improvisation and does
it matter? Is the relational form a
distinct discipline or an amalgam of
other disciplines? Where do behavior-
al and relational contact lead us in
the future? How do they relate to
dance and choreography? What about
Catpoto, Contactworks, Men Work-
ing, Mirage and Faircatch? Are there
other performance processes and con-
tact-derived aesthetics? As contact
improvisation is the folk-art-sport of
an ever diversifying community, we
can expect the nature of our public
dancing to reflect the state of our art.
The questions remain. I leave you
with one final query:
Is contact a small dance? ll
CQ/CI Sourcebook 75
i:J
:r
0
8
'° 00
0
Deborah Hay's 27- the mountain
76 CQ/CISourcebook Volume6 1980-81
Volume 7
1981-82
Editor's Note
JUDSON/CONT ACT RELAY
A Legacy of Ambiguity
Seven days after the Judson Dance Theater Recon-
structions at St. Mark's Church and the event seems a thing
of the past. More so, even, than the original events done in
the '60s. It was a little bit like seeing an old family photo
of an event that is indelibly etched in your memory, but
when viewed directly seems very far away. The event is
more clearly gone, but even so, the memory remains current.
Maybe that's because a memory, as it's carried through time,
can change, and adapt to the new time. Though memories
tend to slip away when they're no longer relevant, fixing
them extinguishes their fire much sooner.
I'd never been to Judson, and I was glad to see the 17
reconstructed works, but I was not nearly as filled with the
spirit of Judson in the '60s as I had anticipated. I feel the
spirit of those times best in the sense of humor, support,
and challenge that I've witnessed between artists whose
friendships were forged in that period-the permission to
undermine one another, in fact the hope that if one got too
comfortable, someone would pull the rug out from under
you and set you spinning again.
And so it is ten years since the first public perform-
ances of Contact Improvisation. People are talking now of
producing historical Contact Improvisation events, writing
books about Contact, and this issue of Contact Quarterly is
Cl's 10th anniversary issue.
At least one baton that seems to have been passed
from the Judson world of the '60s to Contact in the '70s
is a resistance to being solidified-the sense that to stay in
one place too long is to freeze there. But whether you stay
or go further, a "place" has inevitably been cleared by your
passing, and that point of reference exists. Every day more
trails are blazed to, from, through and around that place,
with other landmarks forming along the way; and so it be-
comes increasingly difficult and in fact pointless to fix its
outer limits.
There does seem, however, to be a center-a down-
town, as it were-to this sprawling Contact metropolis.
But that center isn't exactly on the map. It's more implied
than stated, suggested by the overlapping spheres of experi-
ence that the work produces. The activity of Contact itself
is remarkably straightforward and recognizable, but the ex-
perience of it is relative. An atmosphere of curiosity has
made the work a currency of exchange rather than a place
to go-awkward for those who had expected to someday
arrive somewhere. The way is the going itself; we remem-
ber what we are left with, but not always where we left
from.
One night at the Vermont Movement Workshop in
Putney a few summers ago, about 50 people gathered for
a discussion about Contact. No particular subject was
slated. So, we started from scratch and asked, What is this
thing called Contact Improvisation that people are so hot
to do?, What is it? Some people said it was about commu-
nication, a code of sorts; others said it was about sharing
weight, getting a rigorous workout, acquiring new skills,
and others said it was about developing sensitivity. And
the list went on. After the discussion, on our way back to
our rooms, a few of us were walking past a cabin where
some of the students were living and I heard through an
open window as we walked past, "They know what it is,
but they just won't tell. That Steve Paxton has passed on
a legacy of ambiguity that keeps everyone from saying
what it is, but they know." I laughed when I heard her,
but I've thought about what she said a lot since then. And
I think she's right. Not only did Steve offer a dance, but a
built-in way of keeping it alive. Thanks, Steve, for that one.
Nancy Stark Smith
April 25, 1982
IMPORTANT CQ MESSAGES
CONTACT QUARTERLY has always oper-
ated 'in the black'. Subscriptions, single issues,
back issues, distribution through individuals
and a few bookstores, and advertising (mini-
mal at the moment) support CQ's printing,
production supplies and distribution. This
does not however include payment of any
fees for editing, contributors, design, type-
setting, paste-up, clerical or bookkeeping.
Production for each issue takes between 4 to
6 weeks. Mailing for each issue takes about
a full week. The business of processing mail,
sending issues and information, keeping re-
cords go on all year. We have slowly come
to grips with the fact that this labor of love
is no simple pastime. As freelance artists,
all the people who have worked on CQ have
had to juggle schedules between performing,
teaching and touring. Last year we received
our first grants and were able to begin pay-
ing a business developer part-time, and what
amounts to a snack fund for the editors dur-
ing production. In March 1982, NEA award-
ed us an extra $1500. making a total of
$4000. from them for our 82-83 fiscal year.
Volume 7 1981-82
CQICI Sourcebook 77
0
"" c.
"' -'
,...
c:
c:
...
0
Back cover photo of Alice's students by Pat Garrity
"Begin to move slowly around the
room; not just on your hands, not
just on your fee~ not just on your
legs, not just on your arms; rise
and fall a lo~ move on all surfaces
... feel the weight; how 'down' is
functioning. It's a deliberate and
patient journey; travel on any
surface. See, because your weight
is being taken, by the earth, and
vice versa. Your mass at your center
of grovity. The giving is where the
play comes. There's you and the
room to play with Every so often
pause and feel what stops. When
you sta~ feel what goes."
Steve Paxton
class transcript
Volume 3 1977-78
78 CQICI Sourcebook
Contact Improvisation views Round Up
CONT ACT IMPROVISATION may be described as spon-
taneous mutual investigation of the energy and inertia paths
created when two people engage actively-dancing freely, with
their sensitivity to guide and safeguard them. Parts of the body
may come to support weight which are unused to this, and sev-
eral weeks of conditioning are essential to strengthen and com-
municate to the muscles what new stresses they may expect.
We are working on the premise that the way to communi-
cate with the body is gentle direct active exercise daily, for a
suitable period prior to energetic workout. Certain part's of
the body require special attention in communication, limber-
ing, and strengthening: the neck, shoulders, thigh, pelvis, knee,
ankle. Disorientation can be avoided by careful training of
the peripheral vision, easy tumbling, and investigation of man-
euvers which tend to confuse.
Steve Paxton, 1972
Carol Harwood, Gurney Bolster
Volume 7 1981-82
CQ/CI Sourcebook
SIX YEARS AGO
reprinted from Contact Newsletter No. 2
[C.Q. Vol I No 2] Stinson Beach, California,
1975.
I began a fall series of classes ("Contact Improvisa-
tion-The Art of Controlled Abandon") September 1st
[1975] at Cat's Paw Palace in Berkeley, meeting twice a
week for 21h hours in the evenings. Only now are things
really starting to click, ideas and relationships popping
into perspective. Contact Improvisation is an awareness,
internal, and of the immediate environment/situation,
but that's only half the story-rapport and communication
follow. Hence this letter and the newsletter it is contained
in. But there's more to it than just communication, with
only that it's boring. It's the giving behind it that catches
people's interest, the generosity that allows them to give
too. That's the form "give weight", "take weight";
sharing is it. We have been throwing back and forth in
the "core group" talk of people who wish to teach contact
before we feel they are ready, and what to do about the
situation. Obviously communication is the first answer
and this newsletter the first solution. But in the future,
to take a serious responsibility for the Form (Contact),
to see that it is passed along to others well, we need to be
more generous of ourselves, in terms of time and involve-
ment so that our students can·be fully immersed in contact
for a good solid period of time and realize the responsibil-
ity before being carried away with the desire to teach.
Possessiveness with the form only causes people to go off
and do it themselves or "teach" their friends.
I also feel the need for developing some kind of
cross-pollination between the major groups in this area
(Bay Area). Some students just can't get enough, so if
one person isn't teaching or not frequently enough we
can refer over to another class. We need to provide enough
"Contact" situations for people who are really hungry, to
be immersed in it for a good amount of time. I have final-
ly accepted the idea that the only way to be accountable
for the form is not to be possessive of it and try to control
it but to be generous and open, with the form, showing a
sense of unity between us core people, rather than having/
showing. A lot of this has come out of long discussions
with Nita [Little], and Nancy [Stark Smith] in the last
month. Also I have talked it over extensively with Mar-
garet Fish~r, and tonight I had a long talk with Byron
Brown who I invited over for dinner.
. Concerning my class it has been going well. I've
been learning at least as much as my students, and that's
a lot. The beginners were really beginners, and the form
has a lot of material to work with. The class over the last
two months has been 95% women and not as consistent
attendancewise as I would like. I feel that familiarity and
friendship/committment amongst the group is a very im-
portant factor. I guess that's the way it is here in the city.
The biggest challenge has been working with people who
aren't very aware to begin with of how they feel or how
a duet feels to them, the challenge is to get them to feel
something and to talk about it. For the most part sessions
are energizing and time goes very fast for all involved.
I look forward to more sharing and work and accept·
ance among the core contactors.
Sincerely Love,
Curt (Siddall)
80 CQ/CI Sourcebook
pQUl\CS ANO CO
a discussio
Values
KERIAC: Someone at the seminar on politics in FOCUS
'78 in Berkeley, my first Contact Intensive, postulated
that perhaps Contact is what we white liberals need to
make ourselves whole: it balances us. Other cultures have
not deprived themselves of touch and the rest that Contact
provides, so they don't need it as much; they need other
things.
MARK: In what ways does Contact fit in with tbe values
and needs of the white counterculture?
K: Contact is concerned with intuition, aesthetics, physi·
cality, "being present in the flow." That's definitely
"counter" to the mainstream culture's emphasis on
rationality, intellect, status, and achievement.
I'm a third generation Contactor: I learned about
Contact not from the originators, but from their students.
I keep thinking of questions I'd like to ask the originators,
because I'd like to know if some of the political implica-
tions that I see in Contact are just my own projections, or
were the values of my teachers, or actually came from the
originators themselves and were consciously intended to
be a part of the work. For instance: why was this form
named Contact Improvisation and not Steve Paxton Tech·
nique? In the entire modern dance world, every new
approach except Contact is based on a cult of personality:
Graham technique, Cunningham technique, Hawkins
technique, etc. The Contact originators probably pro-
ceeded into this name very naturally, without even think·
ing about it. But to me, that name is revolutionary-it
reflects a whole new value system in dance.
M: What was this value system?
K: A notion of equality among people working together,
without stars. I understand that Paxton was a teacher at
Bennington at the time he began exploring Contact, and
that his co-workers were mostly students. And yet, if two
people try to do Contact while maintaining the typical
student-teacher relationship, I think those two wouldn't
end up doing much Contact at all. Both the name and the
form itself assume that Contact is a collective creation that
is bigger than individuals. There is a letting go of ego, and
a letting go of traditional role expectations, that is unpre-
cedented in dance.
Effort-Shape work is another approach to dance that is
not called by the originator's name. But Effort-Shape is
based on an amazingly thorough and rigorous analysis of
Volume 7 1981-82
doesn't take over the duet or solve what is basically your
partner's problem. Giving body surface to ease your part-
ner's fall, rather than grabbing your partner to "save him"
is a prime example. In a Contact duet, each partner takes
assertive actions, but each does so in a way that leaves
choices open to the partner. When you jump on a contact
dancer, she may roll out from under you; she may choose
not to take your weight in the way you predicted, and
that's part of the dance. Contact makes an important poli-
tical statement about relationships-about what is my re-
sponsibility, my territory, my decision making power; and
what is yours.
n with Keriac and Mark Pritchard
San Francisco, Summer 1979
movement by Rudolph Laban. Laban's contribution was
essentially intellectual, and the dancers who made use of
his theories contributed the physical application that is
now referred to as "Effort-Shape". Contact is essentially
a physical manifestation. Have you ever struggled to de-
fine Contact? Every time someone asks me "What is
Contact Improvisation?" my mind goes blank, even though
I have carefully read and studied many written definitions
of CI trying to prepare for this inevitable occasion. I in-
variably end up demonstrating physically. I think the best
definition of Contact is "that which happens when you do
Contact." We can extrapolate theories from Contact, but
what we have been given is a physical legacy.
l remember that Laban's theories had a similar impact
on my dance work as Contact has had. It was a joyful
release from the mind-set: "the correct way to study dance
is to memorize and duplicate the movements of a famous
dancer." This method does give you the advantage of
learning someone else's lifetime of bodily insights, but
whose body? Laban's work outlined the basic principles
of dance design much as the Bauhaus has outlined the
principles of visual and three-dimensional design for visual
artists. It gives the dancer a choice of the whole universe
of dance material, not just the iota that one famous person
has dedicated his or her life to. That way, each person can
choose the iota that best suits his or her own temperament,
which is likely to produce a much more deeply felt com-
mitment to their work. The result of freeing dancers from
the master-apprentice model will be a lot more diversitv
and creativity in dance. Contact also frees dance from 'the
master-apprentice model. A maxim I picked up from my
Contact teachers: "The dance (Contact) is the teacher."
M: In what other specific ways does Contact reflect a new
value system?
K: Well, take the notion of taking responsibility for your-
self, which is a big lesson to be learned in Contact. In
Transactional Analysis there is a concept called "the rescue
triangle", containing the roles of the victim, the prosecutor
and the rescuer. According to this schema, when a person
tries to "help" someone else by "taking care of her'', they
create a victim who will later resent and persecute them
for it. The way to avoid this dynamic is by not doing
more than 50 percent of the work. To do more is "taking
over" someone else's problem, and laying a subtle power
tnp. In a Contact duet, you only do 50 percent of the
work: you 're simply responsible for yourself. You are
empathetic with your partner, in some situations you even
extend help to your partner, but you do so in a way that
Volume 7 1981-82
Folk Art & State Art
K: I have a pet theory I'd like to throw out, based on
Curt Sach's book World History of the Dance: Art can
be divided into "Folk Art" and "State Art". When ballet
began, it went like this: all through Europe there was folk
dancing; each village had its own dance. Dance had a real
function in the ordinary lives of ordinary people; it was
for weddings, funerals, religious festivals. It was for mark-
ing passages in individual lives and for coalescing a com-
munity spirit. It was inherently participatory. Political
power in Europe was scattered in fiefdoms among many
nobles. Then one of those nobles became more powerful
than his neighbors, took over the lands around him and
became king of that land. The King brought the disenfran-
chised nobles to his court, and absorbed their power. At
court, the nobles didn't have anything useful to do; society
life took over-dances, parties, social events. For enter-
tainment, peasants were brought in from the country to
demonstrate their dances. The nobles watched, the peas-
ants danced. The nobles applauded the highest jumps, the
fanciest turns, the flashiest costumes. Technique and
showmanship became the content of the dance; Dance
became a performance art.
When the dancing was over, the peasants were given
a good meal and sent back to resume their work on the
land. One or two peasants, the ones who had been the
most amusing to the audience, were asked to remain at
court. These few spent their days refining their technique,
giving performances and teaching dance (it became
fashionable for nobles to learn the peasant dances.) The
art of the King's dancers gave the King power over others,
in the same way that the King's stable of fine horses added
to his status and power over others. As long as their ballet
continued to awe the audience, the dancers did not work
at crafts or till the soil; they ate at the King's table. They
were professional dancers.
I have told this story as though "State Art" only arose
in Europe, but I believe it has happened all over the world.
"State Art" is characterized by an emphasis on technique
which is mastered by a dedicated few, who then are
watched by an audience. It is inherently elitist-a few
talented people are given the resources necessary to sup-
port their artistic growth on a full-time basis; their achieve-
ments are then used to enhance and increase the status
and power of the aristocratic patron who has the wealth
to pay the bill. It is characterized by competition between
artists and between patrons, by separation of performer
from audience, by its emphasis on style rather than spirit.
"Folk Art" is characterized by its accessibility to all
people-the steps are simple, the spirit in which you do it
is more important than virtuosity. It is non-professional-
you kick your heels in the village festival, and then go
CQICI Sourcebook 81
back to your survival support~ng work t?e next day. It is
participatory-it's your weddmg, your life happenmg
through the dance. You do not dance because you have
to, you do not dance for someone else's pleasure, accord-
ing to someone else's standards. You dance by your own
choice, for your own satisfaction and because it co~nects
you with others. There is no applause, the reward ts the
dancing itself.
Contact as Folk Art
K: I see Contact as a folk art, with folk art values inher-
ent in the work. Its basis is kinesthetic, rather than visual.
The dance unfolds from giving primary attention to the
bodily sensations of the dancer rather th:in from atte~ding
to how it will look to the vi~wer. I~ ts a cooperative,
connecting-to-others form. While dancmg Cont~c~, y_ou
exist in the present, from moment to moment-it ts liter-
ally your life in the act of living. The context chosen for
Contact activities at its onset reflected folk art values:
no stage lights, no costumes, no proscenium stage, "per-
formers" would grunt, groan, talk casually to each other,
talk to the audience, quit dancing abruptly. Conta.ct
"performances" frequently seen:ed like. a commumty
gathering in witness of an event m the lives of the perform-
ers rather than an entertainment for the audience. The
weh-established phenomenon of the Contact Jam is unique
among modern dance activities: the jam is n~t a class to
learn better technique, not a performance to impress . .
others, it is dancing for its own sake, and a way to socialize
with your community.
M: That may be the way Contact was performed and
practiced at the beg~nning, bu_t th~t doesn't seem too
descriptive of what is happening right now. [Note date
of interview-Eds.]
K: True. Contact performance groups are showing a trend
toward incorporating "State Art" values into the work.
Take Mangrove as an example. They s~ill perform. most of
the time with simple lights, no proscemum stage, mformal
atmosphere. These are all anti-elitist elements. H~wever,
Mangrove has steadily increased the!r use of the~tncal ele-
ments blended into the contact, which makes this essen-
tially participatory form more "performance. orie~ted".
Now they are blending choreographed material wit~ con-
tact as well, and also including modern dance techmque
and "theater courses as part of their workshop classes.
M: What political implications does this have?
K: Bringing folk art values int~ a perform~nce situation
and making it work is a revolut10nary act, m my book. It
not only re-defines what is possible to be performed, but
also fundamentally alters our perceptions of interpersonal
and power relationships. Are we (as audie~ce member~)
stand-ins for our aristocratic predecessors, mtent on bemg
entertained; are we stand-ins for our peasant predecessors,
witnessing a community ritual; o~ is this new perfo~mance
mode actually building a new societal structure which does
not presume class division?
82 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Traditions
M: There are now individuals and groups doing Contact
who not only perform for money but who are supported
by grants.
K: Right. They're doing a form which is anathema to
"State Art" values, yet they're plugging in to state sup-
port. Revolutions are not necessarily what will earn a
living. My intuition is that Mangrove and _other grou~s
like them will have to make some concess10ns to tradi-
tional values in order to survive professionally. If you
try to make your living as a performing group, there is
pressure to fit into the traditional _mold. The pressure.
does not only come from the outside, but al.so f!o~ with-
in. As performers, we naturally w~nt to ~amtam ht~h
standards and communicate effectively wtth our audience.
Our internalized sense of what is "good quality perform-
ance" is largely based on the previous model availabl~ to
us-"State Art". This model has also shaped the audi-
ence's expectations to such an extent th~t the public may
not be able to perceive your work at all if you do not
conform to tl}e assumptions and values expected.
M: It seems as if there is a set of considerations, in tradi-
tional art, that people think validate their dance, such as
working with a teacher, preferably a well-~nown one, or
an established choreographer, or an established ~ompany.
Also: working on specifically choreographed pieces.
Doing performances that resemble traditional ones. Going
on tour. Doing publicity. Applying for grants.
K: All those things validate your dance. But what di:> they
validate? Your technical competence, not your creative
skill. My technique was always lousy, and I w~s more in-
terested in creative work. I wanted to create first, then
develop my technique to get under it. But th_e opposite is
the expected way. First you learn how to pomt your toe,
Volume 7 1981-82
and after years and years of practice, when you are really
good at pointing your toe, you might be given the respon-
sibility of determining which direction you point your toe.
That really limits your creativity, because after all that
time of learning someone else's choreography, you develop
habits and blind spots of what your own capabilities are.
This split between technique and creativity is vety unfor-
tunate; and one of the marvelous things about Contact is
that the technique and creativity happen simultaneously.
M: Do you agree that Contact is esthetically revolutionary,
that it was a conscious attempt to subvert traditional
dance esthetics?
K: That's definitely what it seems like to me. But I wasn't
at Judson Church in New York in the sixties, when Steve
Paxton and others were turning a lot of performance as-
sumptions upside down, so I don't know for sure if it was
conscious or not.
The abstraction which became prevalent in modern
dance in the 60's and which still dominates a lot of today's
dance was a reaction against the intense emotionalism of
Martha Graham-type dance. Choreographers went to the
opposite pole, using depersonalized bodies moving through
space, dealing with visual design without concern for psy-
chological ramifications.
M: So Contact is a reaction against abstraction?
K: Yes. It's a form where dancers have become human be-
ings again. And these "human" dancers are, at least on a
physical level, connecting and' relating to each other. Con-
tact dancers wear their own faces, not the neutral facial
expression or "mask" of the modern dancer.
M: So Contact bas neither the abstraction and alienation,
nor the romantic theatricality.
K: Right. The difference between Graham "human-ness"
and Contact "human-ness" is largely one of scale. Graham
Volume 7 1981-82
goes deeper into herself, delving into her inner psyche, and
then she projects further out to the audience, the way an
actress would, to the back of the opera house. Contact
dancers project on a person-to-person scale. Your facial
expression isn't intended to go any further than you and
your partner, and the concerns expressed are usually direct-
ly related to the physical interaction happening in that
moment.
M: It's more intimate in the sense that people are touching,
and also it's simply on a more intimate scale.
K: Real events happening between real people in real time.
That's why the audience sits so close, because otherwise
you miss half the action.
M: Isadora Duncan swept away so much of the rigidified
tradition in dance in her time, and ''Modern Dance" was
born. Now ''Modern Dance" seems traditional. The con-
temporary parallel to Duncan's impact is the Judson Church
group. Contact is just one of the offshoots of the Judson
group. In so many ways-in Deborah Hay's work, Simone
Forti, Anna Halprin, as well as Steve Paxton-they're still
making an incredible revolution. Those people and their
students will continue to revolutionize dance.
K: Contact can also rigidify, given time. We need to keep
alive a dialogue on these concerns, and foster the conscious-
ness raising of those of us who have been given this gift.
Attitudes
K: I was really hesitant about returning to teaching.
The traditional teacher-student model is inherently
corruptive of what I consider to be healthy power
relationships. The fact that one of my early exper-
iences of learning contact (the Focus Intensive in 1978)
was in an atmosphere of community was really important
to me. Focus was taught by a diverse group of people,
none of whom claimed to have all the answers. The teach-
ers talked openly of their own weaknesses and inadequa-
cies; they encouraged the students to teach one another;
they asked for criticism and input from the students; and
they scheduled community feedback sessions into the
workshop structure. There was a two-way dialogue be-
tween the two groups of people who were experiencing
different but interdependent parts of the same experience.
Students had power and were expected to take that power.
To me, it was set up with the same values as a contact duet.
The Focus model of teacher-student relationships made me
feel that I could be a teacher, and still be "politically
correct".
M: It seems as if Contact is a form where that community
can happen readily because of its anti-elitist aspects. On
the other band, the form doesn't necessitate a communi-
tarian atmosphere, it can be elitist as any other form. Like
you said, the inventors of contact could have just as easily
infused the form with traditional values. Fortunately they
didn't, so now Contact does contain certain progressive
values, such as sexual equality, which are now inherent in
it. Yet it still retains elitism in some areas: bead trips
(whether warranted or not), classes where the instructor
and student roles are cleariy defined and separate, and in
some per[ ormances. ~
CQ/CI Sourcebook
K: Contact began with the progressive, anti-elitist values
of its inventors. But third and fourth generation contacters,
who may have little or no contact with the originators, now
outnumber the originators as teachers of the form. It's
quite possible to teach someone "Contact" in the physical
dimension only, without any conscious reference to values,
or even in relation to values that conflict with the form.
To me, it's important for teachers of contact to cultivate
in themselves and in their students a heightened awareness
of the political and spiritual richness of this form of dance.
We can support all forms of contact activities, not just
those which seem to be "making it to the big time." The
variety of ways in which Contact can become manifest is
endless. The Bay Area Contact Network is a prime force
which makes visible the variety of ways in which contact
activities happen in our area. Before the establishment of
this organization, Mangrove's vigorous and stimulating
growth as a performing company was so much more atten-
tion-getting than the other teachers, groups, and loose
gatherings in our community, that we were in danger of
being obliterated by their strength. Contact in the Bay
Area was becoming synonomous with Mangrove. Hope-
fully, by networking, contacters can "count~rb~lance"
each 0th.er so that each part of our community 1s recog-
nized for its unique contribution, and our strengths, al-
though not always equal, will still support each ot~er.
I think we in the Contact community have a unique
opportunity to foster the revolutionary model th~t was
generated by the Contact originators. We_ c_an validate the
activities that do not conform to the trad1t10nal expecta-
tions, because our own experience in Cont~ct has given us
intimations of another type of "good quality performance".
Instead of looking for the harmony of visual design caused
by the parallel placement of arms and legs, we can perceive
the harmony of flow that results from the dancer's aban-
donment to the energy pathways of the movement. We
can appreciate the skills of support rather_ than the skills
of comparative athleticism. We can pe~ce1ve performers .
as real people in real time, making ch01ces that have physi-
cal results neither good nor bad, rather than applaudmg
"stars" whose image would be ruined by a "mistake". ~
84 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Contact Journal
These class journal entries were written by Cathe~ine Meyer,
a student at Naropa Institute's 1981 summer sess10n. They_
were originally written in French, and translated by Cathenne
with a dictionary. All punctuation is hers.
22nd July, 1981
being heavy on the ground, but alive ... sensation to_ be a
rattle, a kind of sand-glass: If I soft~y change my ~eight
I feel the little grains of sand hastening up and fi!lmg U"f!
that new place, in me. New contact, new sensation. Little
molecules amalgamate themselves and calm themselves in
the crucible between the ground and my body, there where
it does contact, calm themselves like the water weighs
down. Above it is so light. And my warm breath wraps
my face up . .. soon my entire body will be totally dropped
of it •md the ground will become warm ...
To push myself for a new experiment, chang_e again_ . .
moving is obvious life . ... It does not mean that immobil-
ity is the opposite. Always looking for something new
and authentic. And then Nancy who gives that beautiful
image: to feel the earth, the planet earth, her r~undne~s.
And while I am resting on my belly, I have the impression
to hold underneath me the whole earth, like a big balloon,
so soft, so soft. The snake in my back relaxes, sigh~ and
pours verticality: and throw away ~very_ small p~rticle,
every grain of sand up to the top: 7umpmg! falling down!
Never stand in the way of the inner flux: up and down!
Like a great vertigo. Like when I was a child and someone
made me fly in space. Flying! To forget for one second-
eternity, the pressure and learn again the attraction of
earth.
To find it back again in the head of the mate, leaning
against mine-only tangible truth between us: and -z:;e roll-
Hair is squeaking, the skulls espouse themsel~es, weif!ht
pours itself in one or and in the other-The little grams of
sand are making a feast up there-flat-round-~ard- ..
smooth-soft-quick-slow: underneath there is the spmt!:
What I feel is not only bones and flesh, hair, a smell, a tex-
ture. And I like-Touching again, just for game (fun)
pleasure, just to find back that we are first of all, magni-
ficently made of a satin and tender material, so tender.
Would we have really forgotten it?
Volwne 7 1981-82
photo: Barbara Leslie
Volume 7 1981-82
Contact Journal
26th July, 1981
Precipitation! out of breath! late! . ... To watch! A
forest of bodies is standing up, quiet, motionless. Some
others evolve between themselves. I am watching. Feel
like being there. To calm; To not be there and to be there
through the others. Which sensation? What is your colour?
Are you here? presence-dilation-absence-concentra-
tion-contraction-aperture-releasing-the forest vibrates
with thousand little lifes! And everything becomes ani-
mated again: mobility! (motion) Me: little tree trunk
left on the bank, I decide to put me in the fiux (fiow).
Sometimes I meet a smile, eyes to answer mine. Why to
be so afraid of perceiving in only one glimpse! Later,
bodies won't be able to cheat anymore: We'll pave to give
all our weight, to receive all the weight of Other. Feeling
the body spreading, spilling on the ground. To Forget
Bones-ground also is able to not be fiat anymore-diverse
bodies, diverse persons, diverse sensations-acceptance
and sharing. Refusal and rejection-insecurity and frustra-
tion. Question!? Trust and pleasure-Answers?!
Beyond the "look", there's someone living, trying
let's make the experiment of it. He came to me, behind
me: so soft, moving is a real authenticity. ls the body
able to lie? Not be afraid of void anymore. Dancing!
And Nancy who says things we do! Happy moments
when we don't do what Nancy says. When we discover
that little treasure in ourselves. She gives us the way . ..
How excited it is to discover that we too . .. I use Nancy's
experiment, bring it closer with mine: Newness. To
progress towards oneself-life-
Nancy is very beautiful. I thought she was someone
else because I misunderstood what was written under a
picture of someone. A long braid Yau-chu-chu style (who
I loved so much) undulating like her spine, prolonging it,
its double (duplicate?) . ... The vibrating and propelling
tail of the little squirrel-Tsshi! Tssschi! Her voice is deep,
a little bit detached it seems to me: I don't know yet. A
beautiful face, something indian, a gingerbread complex-
ion and jade eyes, glittering like a crystal. And because I
like I identify myself .. . She is not very tall neither,
slightly more than me, she is not very big neither, slightly
less than me and then that magnificent energy! Do we
look alike all of us?
Catherine Meyer
CQ/C1 Sourcebook
"CHUTE" is a videotape edited in Aug-
ust 7979 at the Western Front in Van-
couver, B.C. during Current Exchange-
a gathering of people to exchange ex-
periences related to the practice of Con-
tact Improvisation. Ten minutes of vi-
deo material was chosen from about 15
hours of dancing taped by Steve Chris-
tiansen during the first Contact lmprov~
isation concert organized by Steve Pax-
ton in N. Y.C. at the john Weber Gal-
lery in June, 1972.
This material had sat for 7 years be-
fore an attempt was made to organize it.
The result is a document of a point of
view about movement that evolved dur-
ing those years of practice and observa-
tion. In 1979, the 1972 dancing looked
wild and woolly, raw energy meeting it-
self head-on, with automatic reflexes
getting a thorough workout.
It seemed apt to tune our search
during logging to images of falling. Con-
sidering the perception that even a walk :
is a series of falls, we found that our def-
inition was so inclusive that logging was
unwieldy, and classification became in-
evitable: sloughed falls, horizontal falls,
a_ccidents, falling up, falling down, con-
trolled falls, freefalls, 'splats', et al.
After Steve finalized the script and·
audio-recorded it, he, Christiansen and
I edited the video to complement the
audio which appears here.
The tape is available for sale or
rental (see Classifiedspage 62).
Lisa Nelson
86 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Lowe Chapman, David Woodberry
c:
.,
"' c:
<'<I
...
·t:
..c:
u
"' >
~
Vl
>- ..0
0
"' :S!
>
Mary Fulkerson, Mark Petersen
Volume 7 1981-82
by Steve Paxton
I am examining the passage from up to down.
I look at the range of the passage, from the small
dance of standing, to the linked falls of walking, to swoops
and dives from high points on other bodies.
With experience, the act of falling has come to
include an ability to adapt my body to the variables of
distance, position, and direction and to intuit which part
of my body will take the first moment of impact.
The first part of my body that touches the ground
I can use as a lever. By extending to that part, I can unify
limbs and torso to prepare a sequence through which to
smoothly transmit the energy of the fall, and my weight,
into the floor. Within the brief freedom of the fall, my
body can convert a sudden accident into a controlled
descent.
The result of so many changes in spatial and kines-
thetic orientation in a short time has caused me to perceive
space as spherical. The sphere is an accumulated image
gathered from several senses-vision being one. As if quick-
ly looking in all directions gives me an image of what it
might be like to have a visual surface all over my body,
instead of skin.
The skin is the best source for the image, because it
works in all directions at once. If we could turn the skin
off, we would appreciate it much more. But the skin works
most of the time on automatic pilot. The conscious mind
is alerted if unusual stimulation appears on the surface of
the body, but, I don't notice the touch of my clothes or
my weight in a chair most of the time.
In Contact Improvisation, however, I find I am hang-
ing by my skin. And relying on its information to protect
me, to warn me, to feed back to me the data to which I am
responding.
We are looking at material from 1972, training for
the first performance of Contact Improvisation, at the
John Weber Gallery. It was a hot New York City day, but
everyone seemed game.
What can be learned by catching a hurtling body?
The importance of timing. That there is such a thing as a
correct preparation. That understanding the technique
with the mind is different than understanding with the
body. That momentum can be extended and used once
the initial impact is absorbed or deflected. Or that the
seemingly impossible juxtaposition of a small woman
catching a large man has possibilities-most of them lead-
ing to the floor. But that is reasonable. Trying to stop
or hold too much weight is dangerous. The idea is to dis-
cover what is simplest to do.
In a state of trust of the body and the earth, we
believed we could learn to handle the forces involved in
physical interactions between two people who permit
each other the freedom to improvise.
Volume 7 1981-82
The first instant of any fall is crucial. At that point
a roll may be prepared. If the preparation isn't made at
the first moment, falling takes place without guidance
from the faller.
What can a body do to be safe? Commitment to
something which isn't happening is a barrier between me
and my body's circumstance.
Memory of past judgements tells me that prejudging
is not secure. And memory cannot function consciously
because at these speeds I can't think my way to safety.
If thinking is too slow, is an open state of mind use-
ful? Seems to be.
I remember deciding to learn falling skills, which
have become muscle memories. I figured my chances of
survival were greater with these skills than without-an
assessment of things to come. In this way, prejudgement
and memory do play a part in what is happening now.
Although adults and children fall at the same veloc-
ity, adults are more liable to injure themselves because
their mass is greater in proportion to structural strength.
It is possible to develop responses to deal with this safely.
Slides, rolls or full surface landings, which spread the im-
pact of landing over as much of the muscle area as possible,
are useful in Contact Improvisation as they are in the
martial arts of Japan.
I am concerned with the possibilities of guiding the
momentum of the fall away from collision with the floor
or partner. A body could endure for decades. I don't
want to injure joints. On the other hand, shouldn't focus
on doom. Can't exclude fear.
Efficient falls tend to turn into slides or rolls, trans-
forming vertical momentum into horizontal travel.
I may find a last minute leverage from my partner
to enable me to land upon my feet. My fall might be
guided so it spirals around the body of my partner. Thus,
a fall starting on the downward path can be guided into a
circle orbiting my partner, and finally, its momentum used
to aid in regaining a high perch.
Contractive energy or tensions overpower the sensing
of subtle movement, and so gravity is masked.
Relaxed is almost right; but, flaccid is wrong.
In exploring the small dance of skeletal alignment
while standing, I am sensing subtle falls of parts of the
skeleton.
One thing is clear. I have little memory, muscular
or mental, of what I've danced. The specific movements
my body executes when I improvise do not register con-
sciously, and I can't reconstitute them. I feel transparent
in the action. Causing it only a little, and holding no
residuals. ~
CQ/CI Sourcebook
by Randy Warshaw
As the sixties gave birth to new ideas, the techniques
of the seventies evolved to provide tools for applying and
teaching those discoveries. When Steve Paxton invited that
first group of people to perform contact improvisation in
1972, he had no technique for showing them what they
would be doing, or how they would do it safely; but he did
have a group of gifted athletes, people with strong physical
backgrounds, that could do potentially dangerous move-
ment with minimal risk of injury. Starting with that solid
physical base, they developed a movement form that was
at once both spectacular and imaginative.
As contact began to be taught, physical surity could
not be assumed. Over the last decade, a comprehensive
technique has evolved whereby students can very gently be
introduced to the range of physical states encountered in
the dancing. Moments from the dancing can be extracted
and introduced to students in a controlled and structured
setting. Because of this, it has been possible to teach
88 CQ/CI Sourcebook
people of greatly varying physical abilities complex physi-
cal maneuvers. The capacity to teach skills and develop
physical range and confidence has made contact improvisa-
tion highly accessible and attractive. It's provided the nec-
essary and important function of laying a solid foundation
for full and open improvising.
In contact improvisation, the senses need to be edu-
cated. Disorientation must become an acceptable sensation.
A released body, supported in length, can be developed.
Trust, patiently nurtured through confidence and familiar-
ity, prepares the way for diversity. Through trust, awk-
ward, uncomfortable moments of vulnerability and power-
ful moments of virtuosity become equally rich.
When I began teaching contact, I wanted to pass on
to others the simplicity and accessibility of the form. As
teaching material, I chose those skills which I had been
taught and felt confident and competent in. I found it
possible to teach others to do them also. I got a lot of sat-
isfaction in seeing my students develop abilities to soften,
to roll, to give and take weight in diverse situations. But
after several years of teaching this way, I began to feel
limited. I felt that in teaching skills I was operating within
a very finite field of experience. Though I was approaching
what I considered to be the heart of the dancing, I wasn't
quite there. Who was it that said there were 87 million
permutations in contact? Well, I felt up against those per-
mutations. It might take a very long time to find and
teach all those permutations, but all I would be teaching
was permutations. It wasn't quite the dancing. "'
VoZ.ume7 1981-82
It became burdensome to stay at least one step ahead
of my students, each week coming up with new things to
do. They were all learning lots of physical possibilities,
types of physical moments, but.week to week I felt weight-
ed by the task of finding new combinations for them to
experience, weighted by the dependency that kind of
teaching fostered .
. Developing skills is a necessary part of teaching and
le~rnmg contact. But there's a danger in making these
skills overly precious. It's important to remember that
skills are meant to introduce types of experiences that may
be encountered in the dancing. What is found in that ex-
perience is the important thing. It's important that stu-
dents notice their growing acceptance of disorientation,
their a~areness of the body's ability to organize and take
care of Itself, ~he trust and confidence they gain in them-
selves and their partners to stay with a moment, and meet
the needs of each changing moment. Too often, though,
stud~nts focus exclusively on mastery of maneuvers, chal-
lengmg themselves with more and more complex maneu-
vers as ~heir confidence increases. Mastery of maneuvers
can be important in gaining confidence, but I think it's
more important to take that confidence into the dancing
than to take the maneuvers. It's the orientation towards
a higher and higher refinement that runs the risk of dis-
tracting students from the opportunities for a more per-
s?nal exchange with their partner. The subtleties of any
given moment can so easily be buried beneath the execu-
tion of that next move.
When people like Steve Paxton, Lisa Nelson, Daniel
Lepk?ff, and Nancy Stark Smith were performing and
teachmg regularly, there seemed to consistently be new,
good dancers emerging through contact. A couple of years
ago a lot of g~od teaching and performing of contact drop-
ped off (here m North America). Perhaps this was due to
the fact that many of the early pioneers of contact had
fo_und a fullness and maturity in their dancing that they
wished to apply to other areas of interest. It seems natural
to_ me t~at eight or so years of attention to any one thing
will begm to call forth derivatives. Maybe, as contact had
established itself fairly solidly at that point, a new freedom
existed wherein they could let go of its nurturing. Also,
as contact was just beginning to catch on in Europe, there
was the need for teaching and performing there.
Volume 7 1981-82
In the absence of these dancers, I thought two things
happened. First, many people who had been doing contact
for awhile mistook these people's change for a change in
contact improvisation. A feeling began circulating that it
was time to "do other things with contact." I remember
the phrase "Contact is pead" jokingly tossed about, cou-
pled with references to the "Contact Obituary."
The second, and more important, is that contact con-
tinued to be taught, mostly to newcomers, but with the
absence of high caliber dancing to be seen. It's occurred to
~e th~t though the teaching at that time was sophisticated,
It was imbalanced, and the balancing element has never
been introduced. I know that, for myself, once I had ac-
quired a certain degree of physical competence through
classes, my real development in contact came through
watching and dancing with those high caliber dancers.
Through them I learned to improvise. Improvising was
something I never really learned to do through classes.
. This poin~s to a whole area that has been neglected
m the the teachmg of contact. Though certain aspects of
the work can be easily articulated, the relationship of a
dancer to a physical moment is harder to formulate. I can
explain my weight settling into a fold of my partner's
body, but I cannot explain the sensitivity or tenderness I
may feel. whic? make~ that moment alive for me. The pres-
ent challenge 1s to articulate that personal involvement
which makes for a dynamic relationship with a physical
event. Any moment can be more than just following the
contact point. The person in the dancer can be engaged;
persona! richness. can inhabit the dancing. This challenge
1s especially pertment today. Up until now, we have relied
on the accessibility of inspiring improvisors to watch and
have taken a sense of freshness and originality from them
back to our dancing. We have been able to dance with true
artists. They have guided or thrown us into the unpredict-
able. Today's need is to talk about how one keeps the
dancing fresh and original; how one perceives one's relation-
ship to the changing physical material. Can we understand
and share what "improvising" means? Can we teach it?
This winter, I began teaching an advanced contact
class with the hope that this was possible. My notes for
the first class read, "Focusing on improvisation-moving
from the general, perhaps we will make our way towards
CQICI Sourcebook
specifics. By making certain types of physical sensations
familiar to us through skills and exercises, we've learned to
be comfortable with, or at least accepting of, being disori-
ented. At a certain point, known physical pathways were
realized to be limited and repetitive, and the quest for new
pathways had become overbearingly goal-oriented, dry and
lacking in improvisational unpredictability and richness.
I'm interested in the range of states, qualities, and types of
moments that occur and are possible in a dance with a par-
ticular partner. How can our imagery and qualities slide
through spaces and settle into nooks and crannies in the
ways we have become familiar with on a physical level, and
bow can this more active state direct our dancing or parti-
cipate in our dancing?"
One idea I had was that it takes an internally active
state to look for and become aware of the range of qualities
possible in a dance. It's the activity of identifying, person-
ally, with moment to moment occurrences in the dancing;
allowing oneself to make a personal connection with a
physical event, so that moments in the dancing are occu-
pied, filled, lived-but not latched onto and played out-
just stayed with for their duration in the same way that a
physical pathway is followed for the length of its phrase.
The first difficulty I had in getting to this material
was that pursuing and moving thr_ough known movement
pathways had become so automatic there was little room
left for anything unknown to occur. Mentally, students
seemed so bent on finding things to do that they had diffi-
culty allowing their minds to receive impressions. Moments
in the dancing had no time or space to linger with the im-
agination. The dancing may have been cunning, but it was
not imaginative.
One of the first things we began to do was to individ-
ually inhibit a way of dancing that in class was referred to
as "blabbing your body." In this type of dancing, there is
always a space of time between seeing a thing to do, decid-
ing to do it, and doing it. We began to work with the idea
of eliminating that next, known movement pathways as an
option; we could do anything but that thing we already
knew we would do. As long as there was time in which we
could decide to do something, there was also time to decide
not to do that something.
We decided that as long as we had time, why not take
it. An attitude st;emed to exist that in that time between
one event and another, nothing was happening. The possi-
bility of lingering was "re"-introduced. Most contactors
are familiar with the "finger dance," where two people,
facing each other, extend a single finger each out into the
space between them; letting their fingers meet, they feed a
little pressure into that area of contact. They notice the
small, shared movement at their fingertips and as they allow
themselves to be willing and open, they follow and stay
with that small movement as it wanders through the space
between their bodies. So long as both are willing to stay
with whatever that wandering is, they will find natural
pauses occurring, moments bursting with possibility, as
they stay with their commitment to a common decision
that is larger than either one of them.
These moments seem among the most exciting to me
because they are completely unknown. We might stay here
forever. We could end this dance here. Anything might
happen so long as both partners are willing.
Moments of lingering had all but disappeared from
the dances l watched that first class. By re-introducing it
as a possibility, and inhibiting old, automatic responses,
space was created in the dancing for fresh things to happen_
We began to hone in on these moments, looking first at our
90 CQ/CI Smtrcebook
physical activity. In those moments we noticed types of
possibilities that we realized were there for every moment.
They were ongoing possibilities. In that space, we realized
a lot was already happening. By looking at what was im-
mediately available, we could always find something that
had already begun.
As an example, we noticed the sensation of pressure
where our bodies were in contact, and realized if we needed
something to do we could work with that presstire. Some
of the more interesting dances I'd seen or had in awhile
occurred while working with this idea. Anytime a person
felt they needed to do something, they could change the
degree or quality of pressure. All our technical skills were
still there, although we weren't "playing them." Instead,
we were just playing, and those skills were there to support
our play. -
Another thing we worked with was the possibility of
being involved in any given moment solely for the sake of
our partner. Just because a space opened for me did not
necessarily mean one also opened for my partner. He or
she may be very involved in something, and by looking and
seeing what I could do for them, I might support their fol-
lowing their involvement further than they might other-
wise.
Perhaps the main territory I've become interested in
exploring as teaching material is the imagination. I'd like
to be able to talk about the kinds of things I do that let me
be involved in different moments of the dancing. I'd like
to be able to talk about those moment to moment images
that flash through my mind-personal identifications that
correlate with physical moments in the dancing=--and talk
about how my imagination operates when I improvise. For
me, improvising is the imagination spontaneously relating
with form. When I am improvising, I feel that I am being
brought into sharper focus and find that more of myself is
engaged and expressing that engagement than in any other
activiry.
And it's for this reason I love contact improvisation.
It offers me the possibility of feeling alive in a way that is
both amplified and focused. It's that sense of being alive
that I saw and felt in dancing with those high caliber danc-
ers. A lot of other dancing seemed focused and amplified,
but it did not necessarily show the artistry or richness of
the dancers or the dancing. I think artistry and richness
spring from the imagination, a person's response to or
empathy for a physical event. I'm interested in how
these images and emotions that occur as personal identi-
fications within the dancing, cycle the person back into
the movement. ~
Volume 7 1981-82
Volume 9
1983-84
Editor Note
DEALING WITH THE HEAT
This is about friction, about two things rubbing up
against each other, and the value of that heat. I'm the kind
of person who tends to harmonize opposing forces. When
faced with a conflict, I'm always eager to jump to a perspec-
tive that encompasses both sides, one in which they are no
longer at odds-a view that renders each side valid and useful
and yet, as a result, often impersonal, removed from the
initial charge that formed it. But I'm beginning to see what
I've been missing.
There's something to be said for two things rubbing each
other the wrong way. The friction between them wears
each side down to its undercoat, its framework, thus testing
its strength and revealing its ground. True, the way the
friction is used and why are important factors. Sometimes
when sharpening an edge, it is possible to cut off completely
what you're just trying to hone down. But that's what
practice is for. In Push Hands, a Tai Chi C::huan sparring
form, for instance, one is looking through the touch, arm to
arm, for the resistance to the push. The partner tries to
'empry' wherever the other pushes, to offer no resistance,
thus hoping to draw the pusher off balance. The pusher
perseveres with a delicate but relentless touch, to search
through the other's inner space for their resistance, trying
to force the question. Having finally backed the partner into
a corner, so to speak, inside their own body, the pusher has
only to push lightly (no more than 8 oz. of pressure) to send
the partner flying backward against the wall. They resume
starting positions eagerly-facing each other, body centered
in a low, grounded stance, forearm to forearm-ready for
another go at it. Like hide and seek, it's only really fun to
play if someone's out to get you. And the more heated and
skillful their search, the better the practice.
Volume 9 1983-84
The Studies Project discussion between Bill T. ] ones and
Steve Paxton, printed in this issue of CQ. is a juicy and per-
sonal play, full of edges, pushes, falls and fakes. Several
times during the talk, I felt myself wincing at the action as
one might while watching a boxing match when the swing
connects. I noticed myself subtly backing off from their
verbal sparring when it seemed to be getting the most heated.
But luckily, I couldn't change the channel. What I saw light
up in the heat of that friction was each man as an individual;
his unique perspective came into focus as it was forced to
narrow from a more general field of vision to a distinct point
of view, teased and poked and pushed into the light. And
though I squirmed in the heat of that confrontation, I was
at the same time struck by the commitment behind the
stand.
I've learned a lot from doing Contact Improvisation about
coordinating with the forces-that-be: Accepting graviry, fall-
ing, following momentum, blending with a partner's move-
ments-i.e., 'going with the flow.' But lately, I've been
feeling feisry. I'm a little too comfortable now with the
dizzy of flipping horizons, torquing pathways and unexpect-
ed chutes, and more and more I find myself playing ag!linst
the forces-making myself heavy instead of light when a lift
starts, adding a splash to the easy pouring of weight, insisting
instead of yielding, adding fierce to gentle, no to yes. It's a
start. I've been in the harmony business a long time now.
It might take a while to really get the hang of holding my
ground instead of so gladly letting it slip out from under me.
As much as I love running around, I think I'm going to try
running into things more often, or at least up against them.
Nancy Stark Smith
CQ!CI Sourcebook 91
MAKING CONTACT
I promised my waiter at this diner that I wouldn't be
writing about the restaurant, but I was wrong. There's
something in the way the waitress calls out, "One tossed,
one string bean, one turnip, two setups," that gets me.
She isn't just saying it, she's transmitting it, imprinting it ·
definitely and temporarily on the minds of the men behind
the counter who are already in motion sliding the three
bowls and two setups down the formica in a flash. I look
at her eyes as she telegraphs these orders. They are weary
but come instantly to life and focus once she begins the
order. Her intention, voice and message are joined in a
single certain direction. They aim to get across. And re-
markably, in this fast-paced short-order full-dinner diner,
the meals get served up right.
Obscurely, but surely, this rubs up against the issue at
hand. Contact. Intention. Message. Moving. The Quart-
erly. As a vehicle for moving ideas, what is Contact
Quarterly moving, and to/for whom? Not long ago, it was
common for people to say that they didn't read CQ be-
cause they didn't do Contact. Now, after years of extend-
ing the scope of our 'what', 'to whom', and 'how', we seem
to have nearly thrown the baby out with the bath water ...
Having breakfast the other day with a long-time practi-
tioner, teacher and performer of Contact Improvisation, it
occurs to me that he probably hasn't seen the new issue of
CQ and I eagerly reach down for the one in my bag. But
he's squirming uncomfortably and I hesitate, and look up.
"You know I really don't read the Quarterly anymore,"
he says, "Maybe I should tell you why." "Please," I say,
slipping my hand out of my bag and onto my lap. In
short, he says that as the mouthpiece for Contact Improvi-
sation, CQ isn't getting to the substance of what people
92 CQ/CI Sourcelx>ok
Editor
Note
are doing, but only printing superficial, undeveloped re-
ports. Sympathetic and amused to see the magazine in this
strangely inverted position, I agree with him (almost) com-
pletely, and ask him why he hasn't written about the great
workshop he's just spent the last hour telling me about.
It is true that people are busy doing, perhaps too busy
to be telling of it. And perhaps it's also true that their
tales, were they to be told, might no longer fit comforta-
bly-in form or content-into the format of the CQ News-
letter, now slated for Contact exchanges. More import-
antly, is there really a call for this kind of exchange?
Judging not only from my recent breakfast talk, but from
the number of charged conversations that found their way
into and around the busy schedule at St. Mark's Church
during the two week Contact At 10th and 2nd festival
in NY last June, it is clear that the appetite is there to talk
and hear about how people are working in and from Con-
tact. The real hands-on stuff. As is said, It furthers one
to have somewhere to go.' So, as of this issue, we've
opened a new column, Still Moving. to make room for
that rich flow of ideas to run through.
But let it be said that Contact Quarterly is not the final
word on nor the official mouthpiece for Contact Improv-
isation. If anything, we're simply a mouth, changing shape
to fit the words that you put in it. So go ahead, put words
in our mouth. But, like the waitress in the diner, it's not
the words themselves that will give the message life; only
the desire to communicate can finally bring them across.
Nancy Stark Smith
Volume 9 1983-84
photograph by Bill Arnold
CQICI Sourcebook 93
This ,1rticie, ".'itil! .\fovi11g," by
Steve Paxton, in,rngurates CQ's new
colullln of the Sell/le 11c1me. \Vi th this
column, we hope to encourage writ-
ings that cllidress tbe current tbi11king,
perception and practice of Co11tc1ct
Improvisation. Call it shop talk. Call
STILL
by Steve Paxton
Cynthia Hedstrom is leaving
Danspace (at St. Mark's Church, NYC).
She has directed its use for three years
and created a center in which the dance
culture of Lower Manhattan moved
and thrived. The space is one of the
desirable venues for dances born in
loft studios. The proportions are larger
than the usual studio, but intimate
enough to convey the sort of non-the-
atrical detail frequently laced through
new dance work. The floor is hard and
fast. The audience sits on carpeted
steps under a balcony on three sides of
the room. The upper area serves for
lights and video/photo documentation.
High above the floor, the ceiling vault
is a great curve which caps the air
lightly and elegantly.
94 CQ/CI Sourcebook Susan Milani and Alan Gardner
photos by Steve Paxton
Volume 9 1983-84
it a conference-call, a sounding board.
We 're calling it Still Moving. Please
participate by sending your writings
as well as your responses to what you
read here, to us at CQ, P.O. Box 603,
Nortbampton, MA 01061.
MOVING
Carol Mullins does the lighting and
Dan Froot coordinates other elements:
sound, slides, films and sets.
This team handled the many details,
changes, complications of CONTACT
AT 10th & 2nd with care and efficien-
cy. It is something of a test to produce
new works and improvisations because
much remains unknown, untested or
mutable right down to the wire. A
tight, light, responsive system is inval-
uable for breaking new ground. How-
ever fine and airy the space itself may
be, it is this team which made the
house comfortable for the several
dozen choreographers and performers
who gathered there for 7 productions
June 10, 11, 12 & 16, 17, 18, 19, 1983.
The performers and choreographers
had a great deal to pull together them-
selves. They arrived from England,
California, Canada, the US, and from
around Manhattan, with their concepts,
improvisations and dancing bodies.
They arranged themselves into the
general format of Contact Improvisa-
tion or Choreographed/semi-set works
with minimal ado. As (traffic) director
of these events, I am eternally grateful
for their grace under fire.
•
Contact Improvisation has been a
performance form since its inception.
Audiences and critics have challenged
the appropriateness of this decision,
and I think it true that the audience-
performer relationship may serve the
performer here as much or more than
the audience, certainly for those ob-
servers who require more explicit sig-
nalllng of intent in their audit.
Their expectation is a rather fruit-
less approach to Contact Improvisation.
It is, after all, improvisational. Intent
and manifestation amount to the same
thing. Further, any contact duet is a
manifestation of a fraction of the pos-
sibilities of the form, so, audiences
seeing a performance for the first time
must be content with the specifics of
that dance, if not the general idea.
Much that is excellent in Contact
Volume 9 1983-84
Improvisation is the result of omis-
sions-avoiding injury, for instance,
yet allowing moments of instability
while playing with powerful physical
forces. Omit jarring the body, mis-
communication, physical confusion,
willful accomplishment. These omis-
sions are about survival.
Survival may be taken for granted
by audiences. The performer of CI is
not so phlegmatic. The notion that CI
performance is 'ungenerous', as audi-
ences have observed, results from CI
performers paying close attention to
life and limb. If the audience feels
neglected due to lack of eye contact,
for instance, they might consider that
in CI training peripheral, non-focussed
vision is employed. This is very awk-
ward socially (try it at a party) but
creates a state of mind in which vision
is not paramount, for once, in the sen-
sory spectrum of the performer. Mass
is therefore more clearly sensed, as is
positioning and change.
Audiences of televised sports are
accustomed to seeing athletes prepar-
ing for their tasks, and watching them
work (play). These performers are
primed to make unusual efforts and
we watch the results of their play
knowing what they are attempting to
do, and, with some, we understand
how they hope to do it-an empathy
born of knowing the rules of the situa-
tion. I believe knowing the premises
of CI creates a similar empathy, but
the spectator must become used to the
idea that a Form which is proposing to
deal with improvisation formally,
rather than being goal-oriented or
aesthetically based, requires some other
sort of empathy-perhaps that of the
naturalist on a ramble. It is the mi.tu-
ralist who organizes the view into
forms. The river will not speak of
gravity n·or surface tension nor subsur-
face currents. These are attributes for
the naturalist to infer. The birds signal
their intent to the other birds. The
naturalist is eavesdropping. Birds just
bird. The naturalist must bird along.
In short, theatrical forms rely
mostly on contrast and conflict. CI
depends on communication and co-
operation.
Sports rely on conflicting goals and
'plays'. CI has no point-system and
the maneuvers are relatively unpre-
dictable.
Fred Holland & Ishmael Houston-Jones, June 1983
Dance has visual aesthetics, Cl has
accepted a much more 'general look'.
It just happens. Its subsurface currents
must be inferred.
I suppose we are asking audiences
to look in unusual ways, but what of
that? Every medium requires a shift
of focus, every culture. Even every
day. I would like an audience of
Sherlock Holmeses who would discern
the interpersonal currents, understand
the dialogue, and maintain a stance of
no blame, even in the face of the guilty
performer who could not fulfill his
own idea1s in performance.
I gather from what I have written
that I do not see the audience-perform-
er relationship as one where the per-
former has a duty to the audience. I
see it as a relationship where they have
a relationship with each other, and if
the audience may have expectations of
the performer, well, so may the per-
former have expectations of the audi-
ence. You no doubt get the drift. "It
matters what you give an audience to
do" (Christie Svane). "Art criticism is
for artists as ornithology is for the
birds" (Barnett Newman).
CQICI Sourcebook
•
Two works from CONT ACT AT
10th & 2nd, one of the semi-set variety,
the second improvisational, remain es-
pecially vivid in my memory. Fred
Holland and Ishmael Houston-} ones
performed a gritty duet which segued
seamlessly from contact to conflict to
contest; through emotional areas into
clear physical spaces; to sense-altering
moments when the two bodies seemed
to drag or claw through space; to
events of high play, and casual conver-
sation.
Nothing settled as the dance pro-
gressed. It was one fevered long trans-
ition. It spoke of men, Blacks; they
were at war at play at art at odds at
one.
The space was used darkly. A
sound score of soulful mechanical
grating and chugging added emphatic
menace to some moments. The same
sound, more frequent toward the end
of the work, became a wash of rather
loud pulsations, but were merely back-
ground noise when I perceived two
men working in a factory. The throb
of sound was hypnotic, and I had a
feeling of falling back and forth
through time, from the present mo-
ment of contact to several apparent
references in their/our past: scrapings
from old newsreels, late night TV wars,
items in smoky bars.
On the Saturday night of the second
weekend, 5 folk who teach or perform
contact in Lower Manhattan did an
amazing thing which I have not heard
brought up for discussion, though if
there is orthodoxy in improvisation,
this performance was a challenge-
gauntlet down from the git-go.
Looking the length of the space, I
saw the lights come up on an Indian-
file of performers facing right. The
leader whirled and slapped the second
across the face, which turned the sec-
ond around to face the third; 2 slapped
3, 3 slapped 4, 4 slapped 5, who spun
completely around and returned the
compliment back through the line.
The lights then faded.
The rest of the evening proceeded
in a more normal vein. The lights re-
surfaced, dancing began, street clothes
were shed and contact appeared. The
dancing was a clear sample of regional
style. I realized that much of contact
performance around the country looks
rather more like itself than did this
version. This had its own nervous
humor, a sense of high energy even in
repose, and subsurface irony. The en-
semble feeling was strong, but it is an
ensemble of anarchists and in group-
ings the performers seemed indepen-
dent, as though they might leave, solo
or stay according to thoughts passing
quickly behind quiet faces.
Danny Lepkoff, Robin Feld, Diane
Madden, Stephen Petronio, and Randy
Warshaw made clear, eccentric, some-
times brilliant dances and showed me
that psychology, humor and intelli-
gence need not be stressed to be visible
and catalytic. The ability of the per-
formers to occasionally enliven the
whole space was partly due to the fact
of training in solo work (all are experi-
enced soloists, three dance with Trisha
Brown) so that their solo shapes and
plots looked secure and centered, not
like an interval between duets.
Further, they made use of the room,
making exits and traverses of the
space, rather than hanging around the
edge as is customary in Cl. They did
do that also, but created images of the
lounging or waiting. One was to do
with the back wall which has a kind
of illusion built into the architectural
detailing, partial columns and horizon-
tal ledges onto which they climbed to
stand and wait.
Carol Mullins was lighting that wall
in pale rosy washes, and the standing
figures looked like substitutes for the
sunbathing nude women in Maxfield
Parrish's pictures. But lounging on the
veranda is over, the terrace is now oc-
cupied territory. Such images arise,
have probably nothing to do with the
work except that one way of looking
at this sort of theater is to divine the
images. When one is engaged, but im-
ages and directions are not poked at
one, the daydream-divination prospect
can produce private subtexts of some
power.
The trick here is assigning responsi-
bility. We are not, of course, discus-
sing referential images in the usual way
("a witty reappraisal of sentimental
painting appeared on the upper reaches
of the back wall"). Rather, engage-
ment of the audience, which the per-
formers accomplished; and reverie in
the midst of their action, which I ac-
complished. I suspect something the-
atrical was begun in the first striking
image of this work. Slapping is on the
one hand aggressive, but on the other
hand quickening-like the slap admin-
istered to a victim of shock, or the
Zen honk on the head. Wake up. The
slap form was done as a ceremony, and
broke the old CI mind-set of good will
and 'total trust' (with irritation and
frustration suppressed in some other
mental compartment) and provoked
fresh appraisal about what they were
up to.
Nina Martin and Paul Langland
were absent from the group this night,
but will join them when next they
surface, in the name of Channel Z, on
January 28th & 29th, 1984 in NYC.~
0
Q.
"" ::::J
CHANNEL Z- Nina Martin, Diane Madden, Daniel Lepkoff, Randy Warshaw, Paul Langland, Stephen Petronio & Robin Feld
96a CQ/Cl Sourcebook Volume 9 1983-84
.2
..c
0
c
;::
"' .n
0
"' "' "' u
..,
(.)
c
0
u
~
CONTACT AS THERAPY
by Irina Harris and Rita Ossi
In July of 1980, Rita Ossi partici-
pated in a contact workshop with me
in Venice, Italy, for rehabilitation ther-
apists and others interested in Contact
as a therapeutic matrix, and thus began
a fruitful collaboration which contin-
ues to enrich our respective fields of
interest.
Rita was then doing psychotherapy
for a public health service, helping
long-term patients become autonomous
and reintegrated into the society. What
most preoccupied her about these pa-
tients was the sense of expropriation
that their bodies had suffered, the lack
of care for themselves physically, and
their fear or inability to adequately re-
late to others. She found that only by
direct means and experience-body
work-was it possible to improve their
self-concept.
As Rita continued to study Contact
with me in Rome, she found the con-
cepts of Contact Improvisation star-
tlingly powerful (even if some she had
previously encountered in Reich,
Lowen, Perls, and Feldenkrais): estab-
lish contact with yourself and others,
turn yourself upside down, feel weight
Volume 9 1983-84
and energy, perceive and occupy space,
give and receive weight (physically and
psychologically!), understand where
the fears knot up inside. Each of us
from her own starting point was con-
vinced of the therapeutic value of
contact.
So last summer in Treviso, we held
a workshop together. Most partici-
pants said that their primary reason for
wanting to experiment with Contact
was to widen their movement experi-
ence. Little by little as we worked, we
noted that everyone found the work
psychically therapeutic also.
The workshop begins. After a brief
introduction, I start some Contact ex-
ercises: with the floor, with various
body parts, with space, weight, with
another's body (with and not against).
It is for them both an exploration and
a discovery, a putting into focus, a
union and a clash with their own sen-
sations and postural habits.
We go on to balances, somersaults
and other upside down movements,
feeling weight and energy, trying active
and passive roles. There are moments
when people seem confused because
they are feeling new sensations, coor-
dinations never before explored, rela-
tionships up to this point barely recog-
nized; and there are other magic mo-
ments in which the movement flows
CQ!CI Sourcebook %b
as dance and everyone perceives the
fusion of mind and body.
When someone in the group encoun-
ters an apparently insurmountable dif-
ficulty, we stop. I try diversi:: physical
approaches. Rita mentions the sym-
bolic significance the movement might
express, the psychological valence of
that individual or group difficulty.
She tries not to be categorical but pro-
poses various hypotheses, interpreta-
tions which each can then investigate
for himself.
She gives some examples: not being
able to give one's own weight or take
another's may mean lack of confidence,
fearfulness, mistrustfulness of others,
rigidity in relationships; holding the
head and neck stiff perhaps means
wanting to control everything ration-
ally; holding the legs, especially in
couple work, could mean fear of sex-
ual invasion, etc ....
Memories of old traumas arise,
consciousness of habits (postural and
psychic) taken on at particular times
in one's life, fears that have never been
overcome.
When, on the last day, we put to-
gether sound and movement-roaring-
there is a moment of panic. Broken,
held sounds come out and they sudden-
ly realize that these sounds open a new
realm of the body. Eagerly and at
length they work on the impasse.
At the end of every day, Rita and I
discussed the work accomplished, in
what manner each participant had
shown us something of himself. We
examined our impressions of their per-
sonalities, their problems. The follow-
ing day I proposed exercises relating to
what had emerged, integrating this
work into the general development of
the workshop. And so the workshop
was guided by psychological as well as
physical considerations. The therapeu-
tic effect was confirmed by the parti-
cipants themselves in our final discus-
sion when they talked of their sense of
well being and physical pleasure, and
also of awareness, each at his own level,
of "dark areas", of the lack of accept-
ance of parts of their bodies, and of the
possibility of accepting those parts and
better integrating them.
Rita and I had decided not to com-
ment specifically but generally, to al-
low the experience itself to bring even-
tual insights.
Rita has been able to verify, even in
other situations, that the discovery of
certain personality disturbances, if it
happens in the body, with its own reac-
tions and sensations, is more quickly
recognized and can provoke more radi-
cal changes than an analytic psycho-
therapy based exclusively on words
which often mask, color, and dilute
significance and change.
96c CQ/CI Sourcebook
Certainly Contact is a dance form,
full of life and expression, but we
maintain that it can be used also as an
efficient psychotherapy, or better, as
"body therapy". Both in Italy and
America where present physical fads
tend towards negation of the body
rather than self-discovery, we would
like to see Contact better known and
used. f!
I would be very interested to know
if and what anyone else is doing with
the therapeutic aspects of Contact
work. Irina Harris, 516 Nordhoff Dr.,
Leonia, NJ 07605.
IRINA HARRIS divides her time
between New York and Rome. A
registered movement therapist, she
teaches contact improvisation as well
as performing and choreographing.
She is coordinator of the performance
group of the School for Creative
Movement.
RITA OSSI is a psychotherapist living
near Treviso, Italy. After many years
in public health she is now in private
practice using body work for therapy
as well as more traditional methods.
RANDOM NOTES
from the Breitenbush jam
by Terrie Yaffe
Time's up. Now words must reach the paper. Highlights. It's history-no fancy
anybody's moving around like they owned the world. We owned the clock on the
wall; we owned the gold in our teeth. The sun in the morning, the hot steam in the
air, the hot sweat on our backs-we owned it. We owned the day before and the day
after. We owned the color green and the color orange and all the blues and the color
black. If my language offends you, forgive me. This is an ex-marxist speaking in
tongues. Anybody home?
It's good to get turned around, to get turned upside down because maybe for a little
while you don't remember where you are ie. disorientation.
I never counted who cares how many so many dances all different dances. I remem-
ber my black eye but not how I got it only that it felt (how should I say it)-earned.
Not a day went by that I didn't refer to a poem I'd been working on. No matter
how many times I tried to rewrite it, the beginning few lines always came up the
same: Dance/ a million laughs for El Salvador/ for god's sake/ Someone dance. I'd
started it many weeks before when someone I know was dying fast :ind was waiting
on what? I a miracle. And really I had never thought much about miracles since,
well, hebrew school in N.J. The light burning on Hannukkah was a miracle when
one day's worth of oil in a burning lamp lasted an entire 8 days because someone
with a fast horse and a few extra days to spare took a chance suspended his imagina-
tion and against all odds traveled to retrieve more oil.
Before the jam, the poem had seemed vague and simple and incomplete. Five days
later, without changing even one word it seemed to take root as a poem for the first
time. Before the jam, my words seemed to belittle the very serious political and
social aspects of the war in El Salvador but as I began to let go of the poem much in
the same way as I began to let go in my dancing the actual meaning of the poetry
became more clear.
Dance/ a million laughs for El Salvador/ for god's sake/ Someone dance
The current trend bespeaks the mood/ Bread and more bread/ and more bread
Noone is alarmed at nature/ Midwives slap each grave image
Sweat and muscle culminate beyond what waits
A broomhandle blooms/ and winks
TERRIE YAFFE teaches improvisa-
tional theatre, writes, and dances in
Seattle, Washington.
Volume 9 1983-84
Volume 10
1985
Editor Note
STILL IN THE MIDDLE
L ast summer in Boulder, Larry
Fagin told me about an exer-
cise he gave his poetics students
as a lesson in improvisation: Go to a
movie in the middle. Sit down and
watch. As soon as you've figured out
what's going on, get up and leave.
For me too, improvisation is a prac-
tice in disorientation-training the
reflexes to read confusion as a challenge
not a threat; that a moment cut loose
from its moorings has the advantage of
being able to move in any direction,
and further, that a temporary absence
of reference points can clear the way
for impulses from unexpected quarters.
In the past few years, disorientation
has reemerged as a central theme for me
in teaching & practicing Contact Im-
provisation and in performing improvi-
sation. What began as a physical survi-
val skill for Contact, has become for
me a keystone-not only for the survi-
val of the bodies in contact, but for the
vitality & heart of the improvisation.
One of the earliest exercises in
physical disorientation for Contact
Improvisation, and still at the heart of
the work for me, is Steve Paxton's
'small dance of standing'. Relaxing
erect, the intelligence of the body is
revealed as it fires the appropriate
muscles just enough to keep the body
mass hovering within range of its verti-
cal supports. The micromovements
that occur to keep me balanced are so
tiny and yet so magnified, and arise
from such a deep feeling of stillness
and space, that I get giddy, tickled by
the impossible. magnitude of such subtle
sensations. The disorientation in the
Volume 10 1985
stand comes from the feeling that in-
side the apparent solidity and stillness
of standing, there is nothing but move-
ment and space! Each time, I come to
feel as precarious standing on the floor
on two legs as I might on one leg on a
trampoline.
Without the willingness to risk one's
point of view, to be temporarily at a
loss, improvising can become a sleepy
exercise in restating what's already
perfectly clear. When nothing is really
at stake, one's survival is assured, but
some deeper satisfaction, both as a
watcher and as a performer, is lacking.
But it's tricky keeping the cutting
edge sharp-the body/mind adapts
incredibly fast to unfamiliar circum-
stances. What is attempted and survived
with hesitation the first time, is ap-
proached with more courage the next,
until soon it is done automatically.
After awhile the real challenge changes
from 'how can I survive this disorienta-
tion' to 'where do I find the next one?'.
It's easy to come into the middle of
a movie if you know when it's scheduled
to end. There's an added mystery to
the middle when the duration isn't
known. I love the performances of
improvisation that end themselves.
When a simple gesture, delivered with
every intention of being followed by
another, leaves you unexpectedly
finished. Realizing you're home, dizzy,
delighted, you say goodnight.
photo: Bill Arnold
But most of the time it's the per-
formers that choose when to end. And
they have their preferences-sorne tend
to end on an upswing, others at a climax,
or just after, while some prefer to fade
away over the horizon of some long
plateau. I used to have a bad habit of
ending things too early-just when the
substance of the thing was about to
come through. Once a form was recog-
nized, I thought it was complete. In
my dances, I was constantly changing
the subject, interrupting with a new
thought, a new dynamic, a shift in
focus. From years of watching and
dancing with other improvisors, I slowly
learned how and why to stay with
things a little longer-that a form has
substance as well as shape, and to get
to the substance, you have to penetrate
the form. Recognizing the form gives
you somewhere to start, but it's the
substance that gives you depth.
I'm still learning that lesson. Both
Contact Improvisation and Contact
Quarterly have now passed their ten
year mark. Regularly, I sense the end
approaching, of my engagement and
curiosity with these forms. I feel too
well-oriented and begin to think I've
figured it our. But through the work
itself and my partners in it, I've learned
a little patience, at least enough to keep
finding out that what appears to be the
end, isn't. As it turns out, I'm still in
the middle.
Nancy Stark Smith
CQ/CI Sourcebook
Editor Note
NOW AND THEN
Practicing improvisation in the '80s is not the same as
it was in the '70s. But then, it isn't altogether different.
In the '70s, when Contact Improvisation began and was
developed, the time was ripe for risk and discovery. Th~
'60s had shaken so many basic assumptions, that by the
'70s, it was almost impossible not to approach things with
a fresh look, ready for news. The times not only supported
but demanded an ability to improvise. Contact Improvisa-
tion offered a movement practice that developed physical
and mental flexibility and strength within a state of con·
stant flux. Its invitation to extend one's limits-physically,
conceptually, aesthetically, psychologically-was welcome
and well taken.
The enlivened state of being that resulted from this
movement practice created a strong motivation and refer-
ence point for its practitioners. Just knowing that such
freedom was possible generated tremendous willingness to
engage in the process. The work was fed by its practition-
ers' recognition of and faith in that possibility. And it was
largely because of that nourishment that it continued and
grew.
In 1977, Christina Svane wrote "In Praise of Bad Danc-
ing" for the Contact Newsletter. In it she said, "I value
this work not only for the rare glimpses of in-touch, in-
time, in-tune, but for the companionship of the ever-present
indications of what is possible. The form itself, it one exists
beyond the instances of attempts to experience it, is none
other than the existence of the possibility of a dance in
which wills, instincts and verges merge. Emergency, emerge,
merge. It amounts to having to believe in a possibility
which one may never have experienced. All this is to say I
am devoted to something which I rarely feel, the possibility
of which I never leave. We extend to ourselves an invitation
which we rarely accept, but the extension of it is what
matters. Living for so long on the verge of that acceptance,
I figure it's time to call it home."
Contact Improvisation has always been compelling work
for me. I've invested a lot in it, and I've gotten a lot in re-
turn. It is a generous form in that way. Smitten as I was
by the enlivened state it had the capacity to induce, for a
long time it seemed to me that the form existed totally in-
dependent of our insatiable pursuit of it. It gave but didn't
need.
I've since come to realize that the freedom improvisation
offers doesn't come without bidding. Its pleasure is a disci-
pline. In the practice of Contact Improvisation, one is con-
stantly faced with one's tendency to make the same choices
over and over again. Within the form, this tendency is
countered by working in close contact with a partner who
Andrew Harwood and Nancy Stark Smith
is in a position to remind you that there are options you
hadn't considered. Appreciating that invitation is one of
the basic challenges improvising offers.
I've also come to realize that it's possible to practice the
physical techniques of Contact Improvisation and never
make the choice to improvise. ls it because one hasn't been
shown the possibility, doesn't see it, or simply doesn't
choose it?
Though they greatly encouraged it, it was not only the
climate of the '70s, nor the improvisational forms it gave
rise to that enabled us to appreciate the value of staying
open to unexpected possibilities. The potential for open-
ness is human, and can be chosen and actively cultivated
any time, by any individual, through any form. It is the
desire for it that makes it possible. Like the fairy godmother
said to the destitute woman in a theatre improvisation I
once saw, "I can make your wish come true. But you have
to make the wish."
Nancy Stark Smith
98 CQ/CI Sourcebook
VolumelO 1985
Volume 10 1985 CQ/CI Sourcebook 9'J
STILL MOVING
RESPONSE TO "CONT ACT AS
THERAPY"
Byron Brown and Carol Swann photo: Bill Arnold
Dear CQ,
After I read the article by
Irina Harris and Rita Ossi, "Contact
as Therapy," in the last CQ [CQ IX 3,
Fall 1984], I felt encouraged to write
to you.
This year I'm finishing my studies
in psychology in Heidelberg and for
2'h years I've been doing contact im-
provisation and dance therapy. My in-
terest is to integrate contact dance into
my studies. Experiences you can have
in this kind of dance, like flow of ener-
gy, weight exchange, the falling, trust-
ing, flying, ... will extend both your
physical range of possibilities and your
personal growth as well.
At the moment I'm working on the
conceptualization of boundaries/limi-
tations in body therapy with drug
addicts.
First I'd like to introduce a little
bit of the psychological thinking, which
is very much based on Gestalt therapy,
before I come to my questions about
how contact dance might support a
psychotherapeutic process.
· From the psychological point of
view, ego-boundaries are seen as con-
stitutive [sic] for the ego, as a place
where the identity of one's self mani-
fests. Boundaries are the points of
contact. It is like a membrane which
allows a certain interaction between
an organism and the environment, a
point of contact where energy passes
through constantly.
Exploring your boundaries, your
points of contact, you experience
yourself, your ego, in relationship to
the other. The ego is existent through
the contact point and defines the
boundary between the personal and
the unpersonal space. Contact at the
boundary creates a sense of indepen-
dence and isolation, and at the same
time it is contact and a possibility to
share. This dualistic character of the
contact at the boundary is necessary
for the development and stabilization
of what is called identity.
Because of its importance for per-
sonal growth, you have to care about
the very complex concept of bounda-
ries in the psychological field. Some-
times you have to support people to
build up (ego-) boundaries, sometimes
you have to support them to become
less rigid and more flexible at their
100 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 10 1985
boundaries or to rediscover the func-
tions of contact, so that they can de-
velop more ego-strength, autonomy
and responsibility, etc.
At this point, I'd like to find out
how contact dance might support this
psychotherapeutic work. In contact
improvisation, the point of contact is
a basic principle, first of all on a physi-
cal level, and for me, it always has to
do with exploring and experiencing
boundanes and limitations. The body
1s the pnmarv boundary between inner
world and o~ter world ·and a manifes-
tation, a personal system of what I am.
I'd like to look at contact dance for
a while in these terms and I'd appreci-
ate very much, if anyone would like
to respond to my following questions
or share their experience in another
way with me. I hope my German-
English is understandable.
Thanks a lot to Bob Rease and
Robin Feld, who encouraged me during
the August Summer Intensive in Hei-
delberg to come out with my interest.
e What kind of boundaries do you ex-
perience doing contact dance?
How do they manifest?
• What kind of boundary-experiences
do you have in relationship/inter-
action (in a duo, trio, ... group)?
-physical level
-emotional level
@ How do you experience contact at
the boundary in terms of:
-in between space (Zwischenraume)
-surface-contact (Oberflachen-
kontakt)
-full weight exchange (Gewicht-
saustausch)
What kinds of experiences do you
have dealing with boundaries in
terms of:
-respecting boundaries/limitations
-breaking through boundaries/ "
-protecting with boundaries/ "
-going beyond boundaries/ "
What kind of support ... and ...
What kind of demands ... do vou
need (from the teacher, from the
group or environment), to have
boundary-experiences? ... to be
able to extend boundaries?
• Other associations, thoughts, fanta-
sies on this theme .....
Best wishes,
Gila Albers
Kuhlhof 24
4450 Lingen/ Ems 1
W-Germany
Volume 10 1985
RESPONSE TO "DEALING
WITH THE HEAT"
Dear Nancy,
I appreciated your Editor Note last
issue, "Dealing with the Heat," {CQ
IX 3, Fall 1984], because I too, have
begun to see value in the friction of
opposition. I have felt my tendency to
harmon_ize conflict in so many aspects
of my life, from social interaction to
simply how I reside in my own tissue.
And lately, I have been exploring in
both my personal life and my dancing
the parts of myself that I had dismissed
by omitting 'no's, by resolving differ-
ences rather than feeling the heat of
the friction. I perceive that there is so
much ~o be gained in this exploration
and thmk that it applies to much of
what I have experienced with Contact
Improvisation.
To engage in conflict one must be
willing to draw upon the passionate
charge that emanates from one's
"guts'', tapping the heart of the mat-
ter. I am only beginning to appreciate
the value of this juice. I have avoided
it out of fear of sounding unreasonable
or being too ego bound. Now I see it
as a beautiful force that can orient me
toward knowing-viscerally-my sense
of purpose.
I see the basic aesthetic of Contact
as one of merging with natural forces,
going with the flow, and experiencing
union with both our partner and a
process of engaging the physical laws
of nature. Asserting control, saying
n_o to this_ union, or establishing a dis-
tinct self m the dance is generally not
done. As we continue to explore the
mysterious beauties of the original
aesthetic, I'm curious about how Con-
tact will change if we bring more of
ourselves to the dance, if our relation-
ships include difference and separation
as well as union, personal passion as
well as the impersonal play of weight
and balance.
I see the orientation in Contact Im-
provisation toward harmony and pro-
cess as an important voice on a leading
edge of our culture, evidence of some-
thing more spontaneous and essential
in dance and relationships than the
superficial and goal oriented nature of
much of our world. And I see the in-
corporation of conflict and passions
as an important passage if Contact is
going to continue to be a valuable so-
cial force.
In order to discuss this point and to
offer a perspective on Contact Improv-
isation in relation to our culture I'd
like to share some of the work o'f
Charley Johnston, M.D. He is a psychi-
atrist with a recently completed book,
The Creative Imperative, about a model
of all creative processes, from artistic
endeavors to the process of developing
a relationship, to developmental shifts
over a lifetime, to cultural change and
the creation of civilization . . . He sees
similar structural shifts through all of
~hes_e processes as they grow. Although
1t will be unfortunately oversimplified,
I'll describe the gist of this model in
order to offer a point of view on Con-
tact Improvisation's relationship to our
current culture and on Contact's own
development.
. The basic pattern Dr.Johnston ~es
m all creative process, all of life, is from
formlessness/essence/mystery into
form/manifestation/materialization and
then into an integration process that
eventually embraces both the struc-
ture and the essence. In other words,
~rom oneness into twoness, from unity
~nto separatwn, from what is archetyp-
ically fei:nale mto archetypically male,
from universal and spiritual into mater-
ial and intellectual; and then into inte-
~ratio~. He _divides these three stages
mto five which I'll call: 1) Pre-stage,
2) Early Stage, 3) Middle Stage, 4) Late
Stage, 5) Integration.
I'll describe each stage with exam-
pl~s o~ developments in an art project,
a ltfenme, and culture. It is important
to note that each shift into the next
stage reflects a transformation into an
entirely different paradigm or system
of values. And each transformation is
a quantum leap into a larger capacity
for experiencing aliveness, for being
able to handle and even enjoy existing
amongst unknowns.
Pre-stage
This is a gestalting time, a time of
unity, before one is particularly aware
of a cr.eative direction beginning to dif-
feren t1ate from this womb of possibili-
ty. In a lifetime, it is prenatal experi-
ence and early infancy, when the child
bonds with parent. Culturally, it is the
time when life is ordered by connection
with nature-a powerful and mysteri-
ous ~orce. One lived within the unity
of tnbe which was inseparable from
nature and her cycles.
CQ/CI Sourcebook 101
Early Stage .
The early stage is the time df inspir-
ation, the spontaneous possibility of
essence taking form, the first notion of
direction in creating a work of art. It
is childhood, a time of fantasy. It is
the time when cultures moved from
tribal nature to the sophistication we
associate with the early Greeks, the
Aztecs, and Ancient Zimbawe. Basi-
cally, life is still experienced as a mys-
terious force of which we are in awe
and by which we are totally influenced.
Many of the special beauties of Con-
tact Improvisation are reflections of
this stage. We dance with spontaneity
and participate in an often magical
process that is larger than ourselves
individually. Culturally, this is a spir-
itual time. Zen emerged from a culture
at this stage. Not until the next stage
do we become more personal, more
passionate.
Middle Stage
As the first shapings of inspiration
take enough form, they begin to chal-
lenge their source, their essence, for
attention and belief. Here, distinction
Integration
The next stage, integration, is re-
flected by the leading edge of our cul-
ture. The essence of this stage is most
apparent to me as I think of those peo-
ple who, as they age, become sagelike.
They come to gradually encompass all
of the stages-they appreciate the mys-
tery of life as well as the passions while
maintaining facility with the intellec-
tual and material aspects. With a work
of art, this is when the work is com-
plete and the artist becomes separate
from it. Even though you may have
created it, it will be quite a while be-
fore it is understood. Now it becomes
a distinct entity with the capacity to
teach even you who created it. I see
Contact Improvisation as an aspect of
Western Culture's movement into inte-
gration. I think it emerged as a coun-
terswing from the materialistic direc-
tion of our culture. It has served me
well in this regard. It has given me a
taste of community while all I had
known was transience. It has taught
me about shedding of ego to enjoy the
dance beyond my control; there truly
is something to be trusted as alive with-
out willful effort to make it happen.
These are rather foreign notions to the
goal oriented lifestyle of America in
the twentieth century. But what about
the twenty-first century?
Ultimately, integration is more than
a counterswing. Contact rather success-
fully synthesized the mysterious, the
more unformed and core aspects of the
early stage with the articulate, discern-
ing, and mechanical aspects of the late
stage. But in this time of overstated
glory for the intellect, I see much more
value in engaging the heat of difference
than for ideological articulation. In the
same way that revitalizing the teachings
of ancient prophets has been so mean-
ingful to expand our capacity for living
sanely in these seemingly insane times,
I think we have much to gain in re-
claiming the personal juice that is a
powerful part of the uniqueness of each
of us. I am excited to experience the
potential embodiment of the charge of
passions in myself and in connection
with Contact Improvisation as it grows
with me and with all of us. What will
these changes be?
Thanks Nancy, for all of your work
with the Quarterly and sharing your
growing edge.
Sincerely,
Kris Wheeler
Seattle, WA
Sept. 21, 1984
drawing by Christina Svane
becomes very important. But not for
empirical insight-that comes in the
late stage. Instead, attention goes to
distinguishing right from wrong, good
from bad. As a work of art moves in-
to more formedness, the original
source acts as a sort of quality control
continually questioning the integrity
of the emerging form. At the same
time, the urge to form must continual-
ly forge ahead or it will be swallowed
by doubt. In a lifetime, it is the time
of adolescence. In the polarization of
forces arises a personal and even moral
charge, a strength to know your posi-
tion and stand up for it. (Sound famil-
iar?) In Western Culture, the middle
stage began at the birth of monotheism
and continued through the middle
ages. A result of that time was the cre-
ation of polarized social roles, e.g.:
aristocracy and peasantry, male and
female differentiation, and Christians
and heretics.
If we create a context in our Con-
tact Improvisation gatherings that en-
courages people to engage in polarized
relationships, then I'd say that the de-
velopment of Contact as a whole is
moving from the early stage into the
middle stage. In my recent past, I have
felt that emotional tension was a prob-
lem in a Contact class or Jam. It is
useful to me to see the value of this
stage rather than worry about conflicts
shattering the unified foundation we
have built. Actually, participation in
this realm can create a capacity to
meet one another in more ways.
Late Stage
In creating a work of art, the late
stage is the time when attention goes
to detailing the form and polishing the
surface, now that the original source
has taken satisfactory shape. In a life-
time, it is early adulthood when one is
more oriented toward establishing
oneself materialistically in culture.
With the age of reason and into the
industrial revolution, Western Culture
shifted into the late stage. The forces
of nature no longer appeared as a
threat as we separated ourselves and
focused on our capacity to control our
environment. We have developed elab-
orate structures both materially and
intellectually.
We live in a culture that is in the
midst of this stage. Aspects of Con·
tact certainly reflect it: we have a
highly articulate language for addres-
sing the skills of Contact-a surprising-
ly mechanical language of weights and
levers, when actually the essence of
Contact is union with natural forces
and diminishing our effort to control.
102 CQ;CJ Sourcebook
Volume 10 1985
STILL MOVING
In celebration of Contact Quarterly 's
10th Anniversary Year, we are reprint-
ing the 'still moving' writings on Con-
tact Improvisation that appeared in
issues of CQ now out of print. "Solo
Dancing," was written by Steve Paxton,
7 July 1973, Rome, Italy, following a
series of Contact performances at
L 'Attica Gallery in Rome in June '73,
one year after the first performances
of Contact at the Weber Gallery in
NYC. Both of these early Contact
events were videotaped and are avail-
able, in edited form, through Videoda
(see ad on opposite page). In addition
to reprinting older writings in Still
Moving, we look forward to printing
your current thoughts. This time no
material was sent in for the column.
Are you Still Moving? [Eds.]
~"~
SOLO DANCING
O/TVTl.i.tt;, Ao- .""'.-0'1\-W..
--~ ~Cfv
'"'r;J/v-<, --Nl.,>.(;;-1",
,Y~ ;}Vwyl..:.,,-vlVr~
by Steve Paxton
reprinted from Contact Quarterly,
Volume II no. 3, Spring 1977.
Solo dancing does not exist:
the dancer dances with the floor: add
another dancer and you have a quartet:
each dancer with the other and each
with the floor.
In the United States recently a form
of dancing has arisen which treats each
dancer as a surface to be played upon
as is the floor. Named CONT ACT
IMPROVISATION, it resembles wrest-
ling, the jitterbug, fucking, tumbling
and juggling; yet none of these quite
describes the other; and none quite de-
scribes this dancing. The physical part
is best pictured in terms of spectrums
of potentials: two people freely im-
provising movement using the floor and
each other as surface rely on gravity as
a constant; inertia into momentum as
a variable; adamant (the floor) to yield-
ing (skin-muscle-bone-total mass) as
surface features; and the variables of
Program from the 1973 Contact performances at L' Attico Gallery
in Rome, Italy.
give and take, ruled not by set roles for
each dancer but by the understanding
that each may change from give to take
at any time.
This brings us to the non-physical
part of this dancing; the state of being
or mind permitting mutual freedom,
with mutual reliance. The mind is kept
empty of preconceptions and memories;
it is in the present moments only, med-
itating on the potentials and on the
easiest paths in the energy construct
which are available to both dancers: it
is a state of abandon; trust in the self
and in each other must be total. The
ability to help each other and one's self
must be ever ready: through constant
movement one pursues mutual ease in
constant mutual change. The dancer's
weight is only his tq give; not to possess.
The final factor here considered is
time. The division of time into minutes
and seconds perhaps clouds the view of
time-as-flow: but in this dancing where
units of time are defined by the veloci-
ties of independent and semi-indepen•
dent masses involved in movement of
and upon the two bodies, time moves
as quickly as the dancers move: given
a state of constant falling, the glands
react as in those falls wherein time ap-
parently stands still, and the dancers
shift from our pedestrian concepts into
a time sense allowing some controls in
the endless chain of accidents they have
provoked: that is the improvisation in
which they make contact. 1:!
Volume 10 1985
CQICI Sourcebook 103
Sallie Lyons & Allan Risdill of Toronto Independent Dance Enterprise
One day we were exchanging weight by standing shoulder to shoulder, hip to hip,
see-sawing back & forth. A practice in giving and taking weight using any &/or all
parts. I started with Diane (everyone paired up) and got involved in a familiar com-
fortable exchange. We switched partners & I started with Lori. We immediately got
into a gripping, grabbing, climbing exchange. We stopped & illustrated both partner-
ings to the others. I myself was very unwilling to dictate how the weight should be
exchanged, feeling that either method was valid and not wanting to assume or impose
a "contact" attitude. But what surfaced was fact. The duet with Lori was manipula-
tive (about power & control= outside forces trying to dictate or control action).
Hardly what could honestly be called an exchange. Safety was another major factor.
The forcing of actions & weight. The forcing of the situation undermined safety.
Injury not only seemed possible, but imminent.
I feel in the last few years I've rebelled against what I call a "contact" body atti-
tude. It seems that in the study of C. /mprov or in the development of the form
people have embraced a certain "body attitude" and approach every movement situa-
tion with it. I started yearning for scrappers. Rule-fess instincts governing a situation.
But in the actuality-in the exchange-if that's what it's to be-reasons for rules or
methods became very clear. I've always thought it a drawback to have to understand
& experience everything from zero, but questioning & testing sends you back to the
root, to the reason, and that's so valuable.
Meg Cottam. Shaftsbury, Vermont.
104 CQICI Smtrcebook
Volume 10 1985
BACK IN TIME
Seven years ago, while doing a
Contact Improvisation duet, I was
stopped short by a movement I made
that wasn't mine. "Hey Lisa," I called
to her from across the studio, "I just
did your movement." "Let's see," she
said, as I rewound my sensations and '
tried to do it again. Recognizing her
idiosyncratic timing, she laughed and
suggested I keep "doing her." My part-
ner was willing, so we continued as I
tried to put myself in Lisa's skin, in her
nervous system, and dance. Instead of
my usual moderated flow, I jerked and
flinched, turning abruptly, plummeting
halfway to the floor and stopping, pull-
ing my arms back like a chicken and
making tiny darting birdlike movements
at unexpected moments. "Whoa," I
said, wanting to stop, "this is too weird."
What made me stop was the eery sensa-
tion of being in someone else's body
and in their time. My choices, reac-
tions, directions and timings were total-
ly foreign to me, but at the same time
very familiar. I learned them from
dancing with Lisa.
There are many ways to learn some-
one's dance. In this case, I learned it
through the skin. Dancing in physical
contact with a partner is a lot like put-
ting your ear to a wall and having a
conversation with someone on the other
side of it. Like the sounds in the next
room, your movements and your part-
ner's are amplified by the contact, and
very little goes unregistered, even if
unconsciously. In Contact, skin to skin,
weight to weight, you're moved by your
partner's movements and in this way
able to feel their reflexes, the rush and
pause of their time, first hand. In Alex-
ander Neascu's article in this issue, he
talks of a new kind of time called 'in-
ternal time' recently identified by post-
modern physicists. I think it might be
this kind of time-one that moves ac-
cording to its own intrinsic logic and
phrasing, not according to the standard
clock-time divisions-that is communi-
cated during Contact Improvisation.
In "doing Lisa" I was further struck
by the fact that although these were all
movements I could physically do, they
were not ones I would ordinarily choose.
I had been under the assumption that
in improvising I was calling on any and
every movement I could possibly make,
but now I realized I was in fact doing a
very limited and consistent range of
movements, textures and timings. That
I was, in fact, always "doing myself."
I found this a rather humbling and re-
vealing discovery.
Volume 11 1986
Looking back from here, the oddest
part to me is how disappointed I was
to realize I was only "doing myself"
when I danced-as if I should have been
able to do more.
What more was there to do, one
might ask. Well, Contact Improvisation
for one thing. Obviously one can only
do Contact, or anything else for that
matter, in one's own way, but I was so
busy looking at Contact Improvisation,
I didn't notice myself doing it. I was
too busy subjecting myself to "the
forces"-of gravity, momentum, iner-
tia, etc.-to notice what kind of subject
I was. And I was taken aback to even
consider it.
Within the study of Contact, the
experience of "flow" was soon recog-
nized and highlighted in our dancing.
It became one of my favorite practices
and I proceeded to "do flow" for many
years-challenging it, testing it: Could
we flow through this pass? Could we
squeak through that one, and keep
going?
I used to have a partner that I called
the Flow Machine. His considerable
mass streamed through the channels of
movement, sometimes like a rushing
brook, sometimes like molten lava, but
always ongoing. I would get euphoric
and giddy as the end of the phrase never
arrived-always there was a new curve,
and we'd bank off the edge of that one,
going on and on. There is great pleasure
in this. And it is in large measure
through establishing and maintaining
Volume 11
1986
photo: Bill Arnold
a mutual flow that the trust is formed
between partners which supports fur-
ther risk-taking, as from this baseline
one can quickly sense changes in the
flow as they occur-changes in direc-
tion, modulations in timing-and be
ready to adapt to them.
The kinetic pleasures and soothing
rhythms of time-in-flow can be hypnot-
ic and often go unchallenged in Contact.
Why rock the boat now that we've
finally gotten it steadied? As I've said,
I've always loved "doing flow" and still
do, but the time came when I began to
wonder what else was possible. What
other kinds of time could be played
out in the dancing, and where might
that take us?
What I'm finding is that it is there,
in the departures from the established
time frame, that new aspects of the
dancers' personalities emerge and new
risks are taken. Taking the lid off the
flow container, time can move in new
ways, reflecting not only the dancers'
mutuality but their singularity, in
time, and in space.
Challenging any established order is
a risk, and can come with a fair amount
of disorientation and awkwardness.
But Contact trains us so well in spatial
disorientation-with all its whirling
about, off-center and falling~surely
our practice can welcome a little
confusion in time as well.
Nancy Stark Smith
CQ/CI Sourcebook 105
ALL IN GOOD TIME
For the last month I've been going down to
Wesleyan University on Fridays to teach two l '12 hour
classes in Contact Improvisation. Though I've been liking
the students a great deal, I've been grumbling a lot during
the week about the classes being too short. But now the
grumbling is bothering me more than the shortness of the
classes, so it's time to look into the whole ordeal.
The whole ordeal is about time, not enough of it, or
more specifically, not enough of a certain kind of it.
When I teach beginning Contact Improvisation, there
are a few principles I come back to over and over-some
for safety reasons, others for flavor. Some have to do with
expanding one's orientation to space-experiencing space
as spherical, dealing with disorientation, being able to fall,
roll, and ride momentum, alone and in physical contact
with another mover. I suppose this could be called spatial
conditioning.
Then there's time conditioning, which I'm just beginning
to take particular notice of. A lot of the meditations on
physical sensation (e.g. Paxton's "small dance") that have
always been a part of Contact training are actually as much
about inducing an experience of expanded time as they are
about the physical sensations they point up.
This sense of expanded time is a subjective state, one
where time feels mutable and there are slippages-where a
45 minute dance can feel like 5 minutes, while a 2 second
fall can feel luxuriously long. It is a relaxed state, one
where time seems to have been released from its inexorable
unit-to-unit march and allowed to roam in an open field
with wide horizons and no fences, a time whose divisions
and textures vary according to the moods and perceptions
of the people moving through it.
As with spatial training, this new temporal experience
may be puzzling at first. All too often you lose your place
in the dancing, but you find out through experience that
if you just hang on a few seconds longer (those seconds feel
like hours!) your place will come floating up under you like
106 CQICI Sourcebook
a pair of lost footprints. You come to trust and in fact look
forward to those gaps because in them you 're as vulnerable
and available as you can be, and from there come new per-
ceptions and some of the more surprising and refreshing
movement material.
But how do we get there from here? Especially when
we 're coming in to the studio from Chemistry or Shakes-
peare or Ballet or a 65 mile drive.
The transition from clock time to internal time can
begin during the personal warmup-a period of time often
given at the beginning of class to relax and "arrive," to get
ready physically and mentally to dance with others. It
deepens during the periods of extended duet improvising.
Absorption in the moment expands the feeling of time and
you come out of it enlivened no matter where you've been.
It's this state of absorption and enlivening that I aim for in
my own dancing and teaching.
I spent the first few weeks at Wesleyan searching in vain
for a quick passage, a trap door into this state. But how
could I hope to transmit the spaciousness, mutability, and
mystery of time when I myself was rushing to get in as much
dancing, skills, improvising, sensitizing, etc. as possible in
the 'short' time available?
Exhausted from my struggle with time, I gave up and
found that simply by relaxing I created more time. It felt
like practicing Aikido, where one redirects an opposing
force by first blending with it, not resisting it. Meanwhile,
of course, as I was internally wrestling with all this, the
students were rolling, giggling, getting dizzy, getting strong,
confused, inspired, thinking it was silly, feeling it was
profound and in general doing Contact Improvisation. As
has often been said, the dancing teaches itself, if the teacher
can only get out of the way long enough to let everyone
dance ....
P.S. After all this, I still think an hour and a half is too
short for a Contact class!
Nancy Stark Smith
Volume 11 1986
Steve Paxton at "Site", San Francisco, March 1978
These notes were taken in February
1977, during Reunion's teaching/per-
forming tour of Contact Improvisation
on the West Coast. Throughout the
tour, the members of the '77 ReUnion
[Nita Little, Lisa Nelson, Steve Paxton,
Curt Siddall, Nancy Stark Smith, and
David Woodberry] hand-transcribed
each others' classes, as close to verbatim
as possible. What follows are sections
from several of Steve's classes.
TRANSCRIPTION
Steve Paxton
Volume 11 1986
0
....
0
.<:
c.
[Warmup, people sitting]
Relax deep into the cone of
the eye socket. Imagine a line that
runs between the ears. That's where
the skull rests. Make the motion, very
small, for 'Yes." This rocks the skull
on the top vertebra, the atlas. You
have to intuit the bones. Like a donut.
The sensation around it defines it. Do
the motion for "No." Between these
two motions you can determine the
length of the vertebra .
. . . . Ballooning of the lungs.
Breathe from the bottom of the lung
up to the clavicle. Can you expand the
ribs out & up & back easily? Defining
the diaphragm in terms of sensation.
Bottom of the lung. Two domes of
muscle. So with each breath you 're
massaging the intestine .... What the
diaphragm is doing is a signal to the
rest of the body. Sky above, earth be-
low ...
CQ/CI Sourcebook 107
The head in this work is a limb. It
has mass. Mass may be the single most
important sensation. The feeling of
gravity. Continuing to perceive mass
and gravity as you move. Tension in
the muscle masks the sensation of
gravity ...
[people squatting] You've been
swimming in gravity since the day you
were born. Every cell knows where
down is. Easily forgotten. Your mass
and the earth's mass calling to each
other ...
[standing] ... Upward force of the
bones. Shoulder blades fall down the
back, relaxing the intestines into the
bowl of the pelvis . . . In the direction
the arms are hanging, without changing
that direction, do the smallest stretch
you can still feel. Can it be smaller.
Can you do less. The initiation of
stretch, along the length of bones, in
the direction the force is already going.
The small dance-you're relaxing and
it's holding you up. The muscles keep-
ing the weight throughout the skeleton.
Shifting weight from leg to leg, inter-
face, taking weight, compression.
Stretching along the line of compres-
sion. Center of the small dance.
[people begin to move down to the
floor] Freeze. What stopped, in terms
of mass? ... Bridge the joints with
stretch, so you can transfer the weight
easily. Lubricate the motion, flow ...
Flow doesn't mean slow. Silent on the
floor. Don't leave sound tracks. [roll-
ing] So you're not depending on your
eye for the horizon. The room goes by
your eye.
[in partners] Put the tops of your
heads together. Just stand for a mo-
ment. The idea of a small dance, move-
ment in and around the skeleton, the
rush and pause of the muscles ... very
small ... try to match 50/50 the other
person's small dance without manipu-
lating yours .... then as in the way
you let the small dance move into walk-
ing, let the contact point roll around
the head. Let the body adjust to the
movement and pressure of that point.
What is important is to share that point
of balance ... rely on balance and the
fact that your muscle system will work
on automatic pilot ..... try working
in slow motion for awhile and see what
evolves.
Basically what you're doing now is
a model for the process that can happen
over the entire body. So, next time an
arm comes around, transfer the process
to that point, you can take it into the
limbs. Slow it down or let it go a little
faster. Return it to the head every once
in awhile ....
108 CQIG Sourcebook
Let the movement take you places
you don't plan to go ... nothing is
wrong ... no position is wrong in this
work ... once you are obeying the
laws of gravity, it's really hard to make
judgements about them. Keep periph-
eral vision open so you know what's
going on around you.
[during dancing] Are you comfort-
able? ..... strange? ...... are you
ugly? ........ etc. Is your partner
warm .... noble ..... frightened? ...
[half hour after pairing, about
11 am] Let the movement relax onto
the floor .... comfortable .... feel
afterimages of the movement you've
been doing ... rest .... how deeply
can you relax ... it seems to just go
on and on doesn't it ... you relax at
first, then you sense a little something.
... shoulder, scalp, or your body shifts
positions which allows a whole new set
of muscles to relax ... this body ....
such an ancient form ... we admire
things like the pyramids, they're so old,
but they're fading fast ... this move-
ment, this sensation ... always new
but so ancient ..... the body is a part
of this earth, a moving, dancing part,
and it knows how to deal with these
forces, you don't have to direct, ....
knows how to play .... knows how to
align ... it was made by these forces,
molded here .... breathing this air,
relaxing with this inertia .... Body ...
.... Body ...... This being wants
information .... that you have .....
[Steve is sitting on the side, the class is
lying on backs relaxing in various posi-
tions] .... This being ... is studying ..
... this body .... the sensations that
are constantly coming to these senses
... This being wants to play ... .
amongst those sensations .... Show
this being gravity, inertia and momen-
tum ... show this being the skeleton ..
.. so that they can move with ease ...
show this being the diaphragm, the
psoas, let this being breathe pure air ..
.. let this being feel the circulatory
system ... hear the whine of the nerves
. .. and the thump of the heart .....
show this being the organs .... show
this being the tubes from mouth to
anus ... what its needs are ..... the
fiver ... show this being the nerve cen-
ters of the feet, soles, hands, face, main
touch and sense interfaces .. from the
outside ... take this being on walks on
pebbly paths ... let this being make
music with the hands and voice ... let
this being learn the ins and outs of
seeing ... and hearing ... Thank your
ancient body for everything so far ...
.. and lots more to come ... Okay ..
THE
SMALL
DANCE,
Volume 11 1986
(cont.)
THE
STAND
Volume 11 1986
[slowly, in monotone deep soft voice]
... your life ... of course is nothing
but offerings ... Perhaps hearing is the
most time discriminating sense ... all
these little incidents ... inner and out-
er events ... become a flow ... air on
the skin, and even at lOths of lOOOths
of a second, still what's going down is
faster ... so everything you 're hearing
or seeing is afterimage .... the sound
of my voice getting to you ... even a
concept like the speed of light ..... .
how deeply can you hear ... [long
pause, all in own and common space]
. . . . Begin to move slowly, keeping
the brain relaxed, dancing through the
time ... the slower the brain, the fast-
er it's happening ... Let yourself
move and bump into partners .. let
yourself fall through your partner's
movement .. don't waste any time ...
allow slippage to occur .. [long pause]
... allow slippage to occur and keep
your senses open for it ... [people
luxuriating in slow relaxed floor work,
getting closer to contact] ... You've
been swimming in gravity since the
day you were born ..... every cell ..
.. every cell . . . Have you relaxed
your jaw, yawned, opened the throat
... Have you felt the connection be-
tween nose and bottom of lungs ....
diagonal stretches through the body ..
.. fingertip to fingertip across the back
... fingertip to ear ... Have you lubri-
cated your joints with the movement
... massage and wring like a sponge
the tightness around the edge of it ...
let the nerves tell the brain to send
more juices there ... gently pull and
contract and relax the muscles ... all
those tubes ... plumbing .. [spacing
out to spacing in, group back in their
'present' bodies now] .. Upright posi-
tion .. spine erect .. [kneeling, sitting,
standing] .. Feel the bottom of the
lung, the diaphragm, feel it massage the
organs, down into the bowl of the pel-
vis, relax your genitals and anus .... .
breathe deeply ... exhale slowly ... .
feel the pause at the exhalation .... .
watch for the beginning of the inhala-
tion . . . This thing, time ... full of
rush and pause ... feel time go by
through the breath ... don't initiate
the breath ... just watch that period .
... try to catch your mind, the exact
moment when the inhalation starts
again ....
{11:45 am, now] Okay ... Standing ..
.. Relax erect with the weight toward
the back half of the knee, put some
weight on the balls of the feet .. relax
the scalp ... relax the eyelids ... re-
lax behind the eyes .. deep into the
cone of the eye socket .. don't spend
any energy blocking or focusing ... let
your ideas flow ... because certain
things mask other things ... and it's
better for this right now to have no
concentration ... feel the play of rush
and pause of the small dance that holds
you upright when you relax ....... .
through simple mass and balance ... .
60% on the ball of the foot, some to
toes, rest back ... knees a little relaxed
... Let your breath guide your torso,
make you symmetrical .. let your ribs
be open to the ballooning of the lungs
.. arms fall sideways ... Feel the small
dance ... it's always there ... think of
the alignment of the bones, limbs, to-
wards the center of the earth .. length
of the bone ...
... Take your weight over your left
leg ... what is the difference ... in the
thigh, in the hip joint .. Calling this
sensation 'compression,' take compres-
sion over the right leg, feel the change
... compression down the length of
the bone .. Take your body to neutral
. . lean forward .. compression in
front, stretch in back .. back to neu-
tral ... lean backwards, stretch in
front, compression in back .. don't
have compression in the arms, there's
no weight there ... lean forward again
... feel the difference ... relax .....
neutral ... lean back, stretch along the
length of your body ... neutral .....
stretch up ... let the spine rise through
the shoulders .. let the head be sup-
ported on a line between the ears ....
make the motion for "Yes," .. rock
the head .. the atlas .. make a stretch
connection, a long line of stretch be-
tween the ball of the foot and the
atlas, between the toes, the ball of the
foot up the leg to the spine, to the at-
las ... You've been falling in gravity
since the day you were born ...
.... Slowly let your body collapse
into a squat ... release into a voluntary
fall. Breathe, squatting with hands on
the floor, head relaxed .. see if you
can relax in this position ....... and
come up. [12:00] ~
CQ/CI Sourcebook lCB
"Time is nature's way of keeping everything from happening at once."
-graffiti-
CONT ACT AT VARI CK STREET by Ann Cooper Albright
Contact Improvisation has a
way of physically talking about people
and their times. Although there are
specific movement skills in Contact,
there are no set rules, and the creation
of a dance is determined entirely by
the bodies involved. Now it may well
be my own peculiar tendency to see
the world in a push or a pull, and a
friendship in a lift, but watching Con-
tact Improvisation makes me think
about more than just the dancing at
hand.
The group of people-Robin Feld,
Paul Langland, Daniel Lepkoff, Diane
Madden, Nina Martin, Jennifer Miller,
Susan Seizer, Randy Warshaw, and
Nancy Stark Smith-who presented a
Contact performance for Movement
Research at Ethnic Folk Arts Center,
December 7 & 8, 1985 are all capable
and experienced Contact dancers. Yet
their interests, expectations and danc-
ing are quite different. Contact Im-
provisation is 13 years old this year,
and the two longest duets in the first
half of the concert reflect what I see
as two diverse, yet not irreconcilable,
tendencies in the form today.
Sunday evening's concert begins
with the group fooling around the
periphery; walking, strutting or jogging
in threes .nd fours. A push-pull or
bumpinf. can create a brief interaction.
Someone squirms along by themselves
and Nina Martin makes an occasional
remark. In the midst of all this perco-
lation, Nancy Stark Smith quietly rolls
into the central performing area. A
kind of declarative hush comes out of
her strong yet peaceful movement.
Easing down to the floor as if she could
almost sink below it, she releases her
weight completely, without the dead-
ening thud that intermittently scores
the dancing of others. She is as loose
and slippery as her long, dark braid,
which now and again mirrors her
meanderings with a playfulness of its
own.
Randy Warshaw joins her and soon
they seem comfortably connected,
rolling back and forth across the floor
at a pace that comes less from one
body on top or underneath pushing
another, than from the roving point
where the weight of the two bodies
meet. There is little eye contact, they
hardly even face each other. In this
dancing they don't need their eyes.
They're using another kind of sensing,
an awareness of pressure. The blending
of their weight gives them the cue. It's
not their faces, words or hands but
their backs, the nudge of a shoulder,
or a turn of a knee that whispers the
directions. Even when a spiraling mo-
mentum separates them, there is a
kinesthetic sympathy that co-ordinates
Randy's loop through space with
Nancy's spin and arched back suspen-
sion so that somehow he is underneath
to support her when she finally begins
to fall. This is the kind of crystalline
moment that Contact at its best is
known for. A physical communication
that is so immediate and clear, it
doesn't need added words or gestures.
Nina Martin and Danny Lepkoff
danced the next prolonged duet in a
style that markedly contrasted Nancy's
and Randy's. To begin with, they
faced each other a lot-they had to.
For without the eye contact and the
facial signals, their playful barrages
could have been seriously dangerous.
Hands that pulled the partner towards
110 CQ,iO Sourcebook
Volume 11 1986
Daniel Lepkoff and Jul yen Hamilton, A Cappella Motion, 1985
themselves in an affectionate manner,
might switch tone and jerk the other
person away. The two bodies would
connect in a hip-check only to propel
off into separate directions. A lift
could lead to a sustained support, or
the lifter might just as easily drop his
burden and walk away.
These two dancers seemed to be
working from a set of character traits
that allowed them to spar lightly with
one another. Although moments and
movements suggested a certain aggres-
siveness, their flippant attitude and
laughter made it clear they were at
play. Their spirits were high and the
quick steps and fast, unexpected
changes of direction reminded me of
certain sports like basketball where
there is a constant shifting of direction
to outguess your partner-opponent.
Even though they rarely sustained
a physical connectedness, there was a
great deal of contact energy generated
between them. A line monitored the
space between them, a tension came
out of the constant questioning and
maneuvering in their steps. Finally
they did meet one time in a thrilling
lift that had so much momentum, that
it orbited Nina, who was spiraling on
top of Danny's shoulder, and Danny,
who was revolving around his own axis,
around and around the space. A burst
of cheer and claps greeted them as they
landed.
Good Contact Improvisation can
have both the exciting, funny, fierce,
mimicking, popping energy, as well as
the deep awareness of a physical com-
munication. The latter leads to the
former with skill and patience. But
what I see more and more frequently
is an immediate jump to the bouncy,
witty stuff of dancing. This is an easy
way to entertain ... for a while. It
tends, however, to run dry pretty
quick! y. I think this is because it is
not based on the deeper physical
Volume 11 1986
source of the dancing, the real connec-
tion of bodily weight. Sure I like the
pizazz, but I also like the heightened
awareness that makes vision, words
and gesture less important than physical
sensitivity. u
CQ!Cl Sourcebook llla
-j_'b-E:UR.OPCAIV COl\fTACT 1'a\CHER5
Over the years since Contact Improvisation's
inception in 1972, many Contact gatherings have occurred
all over the U.S., Canada, and more recently, in Europe.
The gatherings have been various-in duration, style, and
focus-including intensive workshops of several weeks dur-
ation, live-in, live-out, symposia, jams, classes, and
conferences, etc.
By the late seventies, one of the more regular topics for
discussion in these gatherings was Teaching. Though there
were still relatively few people actively teaching Contact,
the interest in teaching was growing, and so the discussions
were lively and well attended. At Current Exchange, a
month-long gathering in August of 1979 at the Western
Front Lodge in Vancouver, B.C., regular Contact classes
were offered to the public, taught by a rotating staff of
teachers from Current Exchange. This format gave us the
opportunity to directly experience one another's teaching,
in addition to the by now expected, but none the less
interesting, discussion.
Over the past few years, not only has the number of
Contact teachers grown, but there is considerably more
experience behind those numbers, and with it the desire
for a more extensive forum for exchange. The forums
have evolved quite organically from group discussions to,
for instance, adding a day to the 1985 Breitenbush jam
for a teacher's conference, then another two days at the
end of the 1986 Breitenbush jam. (And three days next
year?) The structure and function of these conferences
develops further each time, as we find out more about
WHY we are gathered, and WHAT we'd like to do together.
New forms evolve to fill those needs.
The last few years have seen a great surge in Contact
activity in Europe. (Witness the swelling of the 'Overseas'
section of the 'Contacts' list since, say, 1983.) Though
many American and Canadian Contact teachers visit Europe
to teach and perform, there are now just as many Europeans
(who in most cases have learned Contact from North Amer-
icans, either here or there) who are developing the work
and their practice though their own teaching on their home
turf and in guest workshops elsewhere in Europe.
Last Fall, before I went to teach in Amsterdam, I thought
it might be a good time to have a European teachers
gathering. Margot Rijven offered the administrative, organ-
izational, and hostessing support, and Aat Hougee and
Jaap Flier of the Theaterschool offered their space so we
were all set. Margot sent out a flyer to all the Europeans
on the 'Contacts' list, plus some other names she had. It
was very short notice but by the time the conference be-
gan, 25 people were there. Many who couldn't make it
telephoned or sent letters.
Several people took notes throughout the conference.
The coordinators of the 1e European Contact Newsletter
(Cathy Caraker, Margot Rijven, Nien Mari Chatz) gathered
and edited them for the Newsletter. The following report
on the conference is excerpted from that Newsletter, some
of it directly from Liz Irvine's notes, the rest from the
coordinators' compilation.
Nancy Stark Smith
THE REPORT
111b CQ!CI Sourcebook
1e EUROPEAN CONTACT TEACHERS CONFERENCE
November 28 ·December 1, 1985
Theaterschool, Opleiding Moderne Dans
Amsterdam, Holland
PARTICIPANTS: Cathie Caraker, Walter Weiler, Celine
Theoret, Jaap Klevering, Jacqueline de Vries, Suzanne
Cotto, Jean Bloch-Laroque, Gonne Kooy, Moniek v.d. Laak,
Pauline de Groot, Elinor Ratleff, Wolfgang Graf, Bernd
Kammerer, Lulla Card, Didier Silhol, Regina Lamersdorf
(Nien Mari Chatz), Margot Rijven, Nancy Stark Smith,
Bruno Stefanoni, Keriac, Jozef Nadj, Mark Tompkins,
Joanna Bartholomew, Liz Irvine, Karen Nelson, Frank
Simmelink.
Meeting on THURSDAY, new faces, some familiar,
expectancy, excitement, why were we together? To meet
and dance, to exchange material, to discuss and share.
People from different countries-France, Holland, Britain,
Switzerland, Finland, Hungary, Germany, United States,
and Canada. English establishes itself as the first language
of the group with a continuing translation to French ...
already the spoken language suggests its power in group
interchange ... and as teachers, language as communicator
is a concern ... the word vocabulary translated from one
European language to another gives different meaning/
image/association ... and someone mentions the impor-
tance of non-verbal teaching/learning/communication. -+
Volume 11 1986
Later, people offer their personal histories and some
insight into their ways of working and the situations in
their location. A recurring theme is personal explorations
in movement that give rise to the question, Is this still
Contact?, e.g., exploration of emotions in the dancing;
inter-connection with other disciplines such as yoga, tai
chi and Aikido. Recurring also a sense of isolation.
After words we jam. Non-verbal communication. The
energy is high. Much to explore. A common language
exists.
FRIDAY begins class with Nancy. Some late arrivals.
Guided partner dance warm up. Back to back. Each
ground. Connecting through point of contact. Movement
beginning in pelvis gradually including whole back surface,
legs ... gravity, momentum come into play, the whole
room is moving ....
Discussions around the most important aspects of
Contact and problem areas in teaching occurred in smaller
groups of 5 to 6 people. Later, reporting back to the
large group, some of the issues brought up:
Importance of observation for learner and for teacher;
the consideration that watching may be the beginning of
"listening. "
The usefulness of demonstration in situations where
people are unfamiliar with the work.
That teaching is a discovery; that people discover for
themselves; that change is constant.
To seek in teaching a process where the joy of move-
ment may be found.
Care to not manipulate whilst directing experiences.
Questioning how to teach in institutions where the
Contact class is compulsory for the student.
How to set goals in a given situation.
Volume II 1986
How to relate wi.th students' physical pain and injuries
and mental problems.
How to work with groups of differing abilities.
Talking about movement seems a more complicated way
of communication than demonstrating the problem.
How to be( come) ready in body and mind to lead a class.
Awareness about judging ''good-bad."
Knowledge and acceptance of limits and habits, and how
to work with them.
State of mind and how that changes.
Integration of solo experience into contact?
Working with imagery; shifting from inside-focussed
activity to outside-focussed activity. How to teach that?
Is there a way of experiencing weight (the first times) and
not get stuck in heaviness?
Is "weight" a state of mind?
How to create an atmosphere in a class.
Teacher is reminder for physical memory.
Can we be specific and still be improvising?
Joanna Bartholomew, Jean Bloch-Laroque
and Suzanne Cotto in performance in Paris.
How can we share our "knowledge," experiences?
Am I still dancing while teaching?
Not necessarily emphasize difference between "begin-
ners" and "advanced, ".but creating structures that have
exchange happening.
At the beginning: important not to shock sensations of
body, but to build trust and confidence. Using awareness
of body-architecture.
How (when) to introduce subtle work like small-dance
or stillness-work?
Improvisation: the most obscure but most interesting
question in teaching.
CQICJ Sourcebook lllc
Shifting activities while teaching: supervising, observing,
dancing, sensing, talking ... ·
Preparation: Nancy-"! make some notes,. makes me freer
to go in and to abandon whatever I planned. Can be a kind
of anchoring . .. Detours are often the most interesting . .. "
Teaching, what? Our personal concerns?
Moving with a partner: what's the range of communication?
(Contact and sexuality, Contact and emotions . .. )
Where is the heart of Con tact Improvisation? Where
are the borders from which it spreads and exchanges?
Stressing the exploration of the form in teaching.
Working in an isolated situation (or location) can
become a strength: challenging the development of
personal ways to dance/teach.
To give and take weight, fun, security, moving effortlessly,
confidence, unknown, open attitude, curiosity, the search,
extension, space (inner and outer), falling, relating with
ground, molecular dancing, elasticity of centre, transport,
travelling, inter-dependence, support, energy, rhythm,
balancing, momentum.
The afternoon is spent in trio feedback structure (2
dancers, 1 watcher, 20 minutes dancing/watching, 10
minutes giving and receiving feedback/discussion, then
switching roles, so all get to dance and to watch).
TEACHING EXCHANGE
SATURDAY begins with spontaneous warming up and
dancing.
The teaching exchange started with a discussion of
areas where people wanted to work-personal experiments,
ideas, difficulties, etc. We soon became involved in the
subject of being in the air. .
The initial question was how to use the force which
takes you away from center (centrifugal force) to meet
your partner again, and transfer that force into weight
exchange?
Here is an excerpt from the ensuing discussion:
Nancy: Maybe there's another way to approach from the
air that asks the other person to join your force-how do
you join it, how do you read it so that you can work with
it? To me it has to do with reading the movement before
it gets to you so you can join with it. So coming through
the air from different places, poses different problems to
solve in terms of forces, momentum.
Suzanne: How to stay flexible and open, to be able to
read that movement when it comes with so mu-ch forc;e?
Nancy: How to keep dancing in the air? People sometimes
throw themselves in the air, and then lose their sensitivity
while their partner just works with them. They are trying
to hold themselves together in the air and that makes it
heavy. They are not really there, they just want to get
llld CQ/C/ Sourcebook
down.
Karen: The place where you are being supported is a little
bit small, it's not like the floor ...
Mark: What about big men, I'm not used to relaxing in
that position.
Nancy: A lot of it has to do with if you're willing and
ready to fall frum any height, because if you 're completely
dependent on your partner or passive, you're in a funny
position anyway.
Karen: It takes time when you're up there to get used to
that, too, and to try to fall, in different directions.
Nancy: Also, when you're lifting someone who is big, to
feel that it's okay to let them go, that you can start and
follow through somehow without feeling that you have to
hold them up there-otherwise you don't even stlut, cause
you think it's too much.
Moniek: One step before this ... what kind of easy exer-
cises can stimulate this process-like rolling-for people
who don't have much experience?
Nancy: Falling is good, because falling is moving through
the air with gravity, and if people get comfortable with
falling, on the other side of the fall is something that comes
up. Falling gives you a force in an upward direction. It also
makes you unafraid to go down. The down goes up and the
up goes down, so if you can get the down part ...
Jaap: I'm interested in the problems of big men dancing
with small women. When I'm going up I often feel the
support collapses.
Elinor: It's usually the men that don't want to give their
weight to the women. They think they are too heavy.
Nancy: Sometimes I find with heavier people who are
afraid to give their weight, that they don't give their center.
The center is off to the side so I can't get under it to sup-
port it and then they think, "Yeah, see? Well they can't
support me" and so ... they just keep the problem going.
There are some men who are really quite large, and they
give their center and the weight stays alive and even if it's
a lot of weight you really can work with it a little bit. And
they feel secure and you feel secure, which leads to less
tension and thus more 'levity.' There's an exercise I
do sometimes, it's a climbing exercise and if it goes slow
enough you can feel and find your skeletal support.
There's no momentum involved and it's not particularly
light, it's quite heavy. But in the heaviness you find where
the weight can be supported and how it feels. Then later
when there's a little momentum it's lighter and you know
where the places are, where you can go to support the
weight (or be supported well).
Mark: Even if I go up, it's already become a habit that I
don't stay very long, so I never hang out there.
Jaap: I'm finding out that it's not the point to stay very
long, it's not the point that you're going up, the point is
that you're moving and you happen to be up.
Mark: But I'm talking about a technical level, as far as
knowing what that is, to be suspended in the air. I know
much less about it than you guys.
Nancy: Maybe something to do is just hang out up there
for one extra second. Again, it's like working with any --'*
Volume 11 1986
limit-because it's a rhythm, up and down, up and down ..
so you're just stretching or,opening the limit a little bit
instead of 'how can I really stay so long' but just two
more seconds and see what happens.
Jaap: But there's one point-like when I'm dancing with
Jaana for example, she's small, and when she's on me I
have a lot of places for support, and when I'm on her she
is really so small!!
Nancy: People who are good supports really know how to
use the movement continually for support as well as
surfaces. There's really very little that the person up there
has to do because there's so much riding the movement
that's happening-with the little shifts to get around the
shoulders, etc. Sometimes I really feel juggled by people.
It's not 'cause they're strong but it's all the little stuff
that they're doing. I want to learn to do that more. (To
Karen) You work with a man about your size so you 're
quite equal in your weight support, which is a great oppor-
tunity, because sometimes women don't lift small women
either for very long, because they're not used to having
someone up there very long.
In the afternoon we had the actual teaching exchange.
The mats were out and first Karen had us practicing Aikido
breakfalls. Then Nancy led us in some light disorientation
practice and we went on to jumping on people who were
posts, approaching from the air and reaching your partner
while still in that light state.
During this session one question came up which seems
essential to Contact teaching: When working on skills, does
teaching specific movements or exercises have the same
result as teaching a principle and improvising within that
principle? How can you teach people to improvise if
not by letting them find their own forms and ways to do
things?
Later on, Mark led a class which encompassed focussed
duets as well as a dynamic group dance with brief and
changing encounters. Focus: dancing with different people
while still maintaining awareness of your original partner's
center, then coming back to dancing with the original part-
ner with an awareness of the group.
Suzanne led an experiment which was about accumulat-
ing energy and force during a common stillness in the
dance, while still in physical contact ... until the accumu-
lated force releases into movement through space.
Later, watching "Magnesium" and "Chute" videos
evokes a sense of history.
Post-dinner networking discussion brings us to the
publication of a European Newsletter and the setting up
of a European Jam.
DISCUSSION ABOUT NETWORKING
What is the reason for networking?
Needs, desires could be divided in:
• To keep informed about the places where Contact is
being developed: classes, workshops, performances,
addresses, dates.
• To know possibilities to meet and to dance with other
Contact dancers. Includes: knowing places and dates
where and when Contact is going on; organizing Jams
in Europe. Mark Tompkins reported about the experiences
with the first European Jam in summer 1982 in the country-
side of Southern France, organized by L'Atelier Contact.
Important points were the necessity of good space and
sleeping accomodations; costs (admission fee to cover space
and organization, then there's room and board, and travel
cost at the individual's expense!). Suzanne, Jean and
Joanna offered to set up a Jam near Paris around the 1st
of May.
• To exchange about teaching and research in Contact.
Possibilities: To invite another teacher to your studio.
To continue with this Conference once a year. Important
considerations: Who will organize the next one? The
necessity of good housing. Costs as mentioned above plus
possibly the fee for inviting a special teacher (the presence,
guidance and knowledge of Nancy was very inspiring and
supporting). The length of this conference was generally
considered too short.
To deal with these aspects brought up the idea of starting
a Newsletter. We should be clear about its aims: If it
should be to inform each other in a central way; or if it
should be a way of sharing experiences and exchanging
ways of working. We ~ecided to choose for the way to
inform each other, and to leave the sharing of the work
to the Contact Quarterly. Organizational agreements:
• Type your own letter (one page) with information
about your teaching and up-coming events in your area.
• Each time there should be a coordinator.
• Two issues a year to coordinate with CQ deadline so it
can be a part of the magazine.
• Send money to the next coordinator if you'd like to
receive a copy (or else it cannot be made and sent).
We finished the conference realizing the NETWORK
IS A FACT! -tt
[More news from this Newsletter and deadline information for the
next one can be found in the CQ Newsletter in this issue./
The thing about falling down, if you do a fall and it gets a certain kind
of laugh, a laugh that almost precedes rather than follows the fall, well,
it's like falling on cushions of air ... When they don't laugh, it's like a
misspent effort, and boy, then you feel the bones hit the floor.
---Bill Irwin, clown
---~ SUBSCRIBE TO CQ!
Volume 11 1986 CQ/Cl Sourcebook llle
RECOGNIZING DANCE
I am in a form. A form of discipline. Focused outwards and inwards. Making connections, which
make me to dance. I'm a mover alright. Eventually I'm moving the walls and the space between the walls.
Me, as a centering organ, as a source of strength. (One powerful enough command and I would fly up,
straight to the ceiling.)
What I really do is hard to explain. I'm the centre of the space around me alright, and also of everything
else, moving in that space. And it sometimes feels like it's me who makes it to move.
I know of course, it's me who's moving, but something inside my skull stays steady, in one place, never
shoving out of place ... however much I'm going upside down, through whatever angles. In fact, the more
angles I'm making, the more steady th is one part of me becomes. And the more steady this observing part
of me is, the better I can make the world around me move.
It's an interesting discovery. My body no longer distracted, because my organs no longer protest against
every leap I make. There is an adjustment which makes it possible for my mind to follow the body, and for
my body to follow the mind.
Moving around I'm getting closer. Moving around I'm opening up. Getting aware of other people in the
same space. Getting aware of other bodies (like mine, but different) moving around (but telling a different
tale). Getting aware I'm actually moving in space which is shared by all the other bodies in the very same
time. And by sharing this space, I'm sharing a conception. I'm sharing a movement, with every echo of it
rolling between the walls of the space, wherein my body is responding, like a boat on the water.
Effecting and being effected: my mind, with images. Mildly changing, disturbing changing, or however.
My body, in the space. And some of the bodies around me, dancing. With the same mild flow or strangeness
or confusion. However these waves in this stretch of time flow. And however much a mind is willing to
allow changes to happen.
My steady me is observing this. This part of me is the only part which doesn't let go. It's the part which
must lay hidden in layers there are in my brains. It's a part which comes out on those moments/in those
movements, when everything else is swimming in the stream. Comprehension. Understanding. Not the
detail. Not the current. Not the face that expresses and reveals, but a sort of silent memo. A sentence like:
"I was still, no movement at all." Which is nothing more than recognizing a situation and accepting the
absolute truth of it. Which means that on that moment, there is a balance of forces, focused on the moving
body. And the observation of such is the key of control.
Then my steady part falls back inside its hidingplace and there are only all of my senses left, sprawling in
the dance. Dancing with other bodies, all in the same room. Space, time separating. An improvisation
about survival.
Going around somebody's back, falling down, head first towards the floor, rolling, jumping up. Waiting,
out of balance. Being out of balance all the time. That's the essence of this dance form.
Trying to cope with that which moves around you. Trying to grasp a shift of weight. Feeling the floor
move away and around. Focusing eyes, sensing ears, balancing feet, flexing spine.
Finding a way to the end of that rope. Landing on hands and feet. Feeling the ground getting to rest,
while sitting. Waiting for echos to finally fade. Walls becoming walls and bodies becoming personal objects.
A sense of distance restored once more ...
Jaap Klevering
112 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume 11 1986
TAKING NO FOR AN ANSWER
Today is my birthday and I'm sitting in my car,
parked, with the engine running, outside our building,
watching the shadow of the building rise on a high pile of
snow as the sun goes down behind the building. Maybe
sitting here facing this blank page is the closest I'll be able
to get in writing to the feeling of improvising. Because
how can you describe something that isn't there yet? I
want to be able to write from inside the movements of an
improvisation and tell from there how things look, how
they feel, how they're going. But I keep finding myself
back here walking the line, on the page, trying to make
pens pirouette, words walk and ideas bounce and split
open, like dancing can do. I'm impressed and informed by
all the efforts evident in this issue of people putting a
finger on what isn't there. It's like talking about a hole.
In this issue, we're trying to say what shapes the hole
from within.
In the early '70s, when I was first getting immersed in
the world of practicing and performing dance improvisa-
tion, I spent a lot of time watching the Grand Union•
perform. For hours, I would see material surface on
shaky ground, get nourished, worked, referred to, develop-
ed, and I'd see it begin to strengthen, come into its own,
and become the ground for what would happen next. I
saw material be given life or death (which in itself could
become the next material), and I learned that there was,
in practice, no inherent hierarchy of material. Every move
had equal potential to unify, clarify, destroy, or transform
what was going on. It was not just the material itself but
how and when it was delivered that gave it depth and
power.
Where you are when you don't know where you are is
one of the most precious spots offered by improvisation.
It is a place from which more directions are possible than
anywhere else. I call this place the Gap. The more I im-
• A Dance Theater improvisation group including Yvonne Rainer,
David Gordon, Steve Paxton, Trisha Brown, Barbara (Lloyd)
Dilley, Nancy (Green) Lewis, and Douglas Dunn.
Volume 12 1987
Volume 12
1987
provise, the more I'm convinced that it is through the
medium of these gaps-this momentary suspension of
reference point-that comes the unexpected and much
sought after 'original' material. It's 'original' because its
origin is in the current moment and because it comes from
outside our usual frame of reference.
When Katie Duck teaches improvisation, as she has
many times as a guest teacher at the Theaterschool in
Amsterdam, she often tells people not to use their first
impulse, but instead to wait for maybe the second or third
before taking action. This ability to wait and not follow
the impulse is a lot like learning how to break a habit.
Holding the moment open a few seconds longer widens
the gap where the old behavior/idea/movement/thought/
feeling would have gone. And maybe you have nothing
to put in its stead. So you put in nothing.
On January 28th, it was a year since I stopped smoking
(and, coincidentally, a year since the space shuttle Chal-
lenger exploded). I never stopped before and the change
feels enormous. Every time I want a cigarette and don't
have one I'm creating a gap. Moments that once were
easily and automatically filled, have become uneasily and
consciously unfilled. By leaving them unfilled, I'm not
only breaking a 'momentum of being', a pattern of behav-
ior, but I'm bringing attention and charge to a moment
that would have passed without remark. One of the things
that improvising and stopping smoking have in common is
that they both require an appetite for learning. Both have
the capacity to take you to new ground. Both are about
unconscious pulls and conscious choices, about reckoning
with habitual perspectives and behaviors.
Being in a gap is iike being in a fall before you touch
bottom. You're suspended-in time as well as space-and
you don't really know how long it'll take to get 'back'.
And then, when you do finally get back, no one even
noticed you were gone.
Nancy Stark Smith
CQICI Sourcebook 113
THE AWARENESS OF CHANGE
by Chris Mathias
The state or space created in
the workshop setting decreases
the stimuli of the outside world
so that the internal impulses of
our dancing can be felt, seen and
acted upon. Once the outer
arrangement has less of an influ-
ence, then the inner space be-
comes fuller, more alive and its
range of possibilities become
wider. The awareness of change
in the inner space becomes vivid
so that when the outer space of
our world increases its influence,
we do not lose the ground we
have gained from the inner world.
These statements were gleaned
from a month's worth of writings,
thoughts and discussions I participated
in at Naropa Institute Summer 1986.
However vague and general, they seem
to apply to the state of mind we reach
when awareness is brought to our
dancing. During the course of the four
weeks of Contact Improvisation classes
taught by Nancy Stark Smith, we talk-
ed a lot about the "Ready State,"
never actually defining it, but neverthe-
less knowing when it had occurred.
There never seemed to be a standard
way of preparing the body to dance,
but one ingredient was always required.
Awareness of body sensation, move-
ment and body/mind states. Once in
the "Ready State," every part of our
being participates actively. When not
ready, some part of us hangs back,
watches, refusing to participate, creat-
ing a rift within our own dancing and
between us and our partner.
114 CQ/CI Sourcebook
It seems that awareness implies
action, and if this is true, then in the
"Ready State" of Contact Improvisa-
tion we must actively know our sensa-
tions, movement and mind states. To
know actively, or to bring awareness to
dancing allows expression; the exchange
of one body of knowledge with anoth·
er. In my ignorance, I seemed to think
that the "Ready State" was something
to be achieved. A way of doing this
was to identify the stages one might go
through to reach the "Ready Stire."
They came as follows:
1. Getting into the body-requires
a shifting of mind into bodily terms,
i.e., sensation, imagery and movement
quality.
2. Body time-now in the body,
the action is of deepening quality.
3. Body Sensitivity---,body sensation
and states of mind become finely
tuned. The sensitivity to and aware-
ness of body sensation and body minds
is increased.
4. Body Expression and Exchange-
moving out of inner sensation and into
exchange with a partner. The body be-
comes the mode from which I relate.
Although these stages offered some
insight into the process, they also told
me something about my ambition to
achieve something that I thought was
necessary. The "Ready State" requires
only to be where you are, not where
you think you should be. This slight
shift means bringing an awareness to
the changes happening in our dancing;
changing and guiding the changes as
well, so that the dancing becomes an
exchange between the inner and outer
impulses. This awareness is full bod-
ied, the mind responds to the body
and the body responds to the mind. It
is a way of being with change. Being
comfortable with frustration, ambigu-
ity and basically not knowing what
comes next. A way of being which
begins without expectations of what
will come, freeing you to be with
whatever is occurring.
In looking back at the time spent
at Naropa, I see that we seemed to
create a space for ourselves that aimed
for freedom from distraction. We
cleared and prepared ourselves to
dance in the most honest way we knew
how. The discipline of Contact Im-
provisation requires this clarity of
body, mind and spirit, so that the
person can deepen within the form
and of equal importance, enjoy their
dancing.{::{
TEACH I NG SCORE 1
PUPPET-PUPPETEER: Jonathan Smith
I started the class off with unstructured solo warm up, asking for people
to soften, and to move without working at it, and then continue in this mode
into a slow duet warm up dance with the same qualities. The material that I
presented was what I call the puppet-puppeteer motif. I developed this style
of movement out of an image from a Robin Feld class working with manipu-
lations. She was dressed in black and was moving a colorfully dressed person.
I asked people to start off with a light touch, suggesting working the pup-
pet by the upper body from behind, using the puppet's upper arms, or by
pulling and leading from in front. The puppeteer does all the initiation; the
puppet can follow through but not initiate. For example, the puppeteer can
move the puppet's arm up and the puppet's arm can then slowly float down
like a feather. Then the quality can get heavier, the puppeteer can bring the
puppet into his or her center, taking more weight, nurturing and caring for
the puppet; finally bringing the puppet to the floor, rocking it and putting it
to sleep. I used this motif in a section of a dance that I created and performed
in New York, June 1985, called "The River of Cause (because because because
because because)."
Volume 12 1987
NOTES ON THE 1986
BREIT~NBUSH CONTACT JAM
AND TEACHER'S CONFERENCE
by Kurt Koegel
The jam/conference was a dialogue
between doing and contemplation,
playing freely and then defining what
seemed to be happening. It was a spa-
cious time where together we sculpted
our shifting understandings of the
work.
One of the joys of this process of in-
quiry was its immediacy-the being
able to move from a stimulating discus-
sion straight into dancing-or coming
upon a discovery dancing ... and
having the context, right there, to im-
mediately share it with someone, or
the group ... so to articulate the
elusive find .. .
In this setting the work was given
range, depth, and focus-we experi-
enced it as a vehicle of personal expres-
sion and development and as an influ-
ence in the structure of today's society.
And the conference was about
COMMUNITY.
Other than finding out about the broad
and concentrated research that is hap-
pening, I recall the connectedness and
power I experienced'there. I've been
in many group situations and worked
on many projects, but I've never felt
such a strong, nurturing, and inspiring
sense of community.
There were no leaders or followers-
rather we were all leaders and follow-
ers, speakers and listeners, guides 'and
journeyers. There were plenty of op-
portunities for both taking in new in-
formation, ideas and processes-and
presenting ideas or formats or situa-
tions. It happened in structured ways-
such as the classes where four different
people would take a segment and pre-
sent an approach to teaching-and it
happened in informal meetings, dia-
logues, and dances.
This in itself was a melding of idea and
practice. One evening Steve Paxton got
into a 'where-does-contact-improvisa-
tion-fit-in to-the-history-of-dance' talk,
and described that one of the roots of
contact was its aim to break with the
conventional representations of social
structure; to deal with relationships
between people on a more anarchistic/
democratic level.
And true to its form, this open struc-
ture allowed a lot of energy to be ex-
changed. Not only did we discover our
similarities, but also our differences.
There were questions of style & process
& orientation that were not always
easy for people to negotiate-yet a will-
ingness to encompass it all and work it
through pervaded. And again, the flu-
ency .between these states was really
excmng, and I find, now gives me a
new perspective when working with
peers. Something about keeping the
space open enough to allow for the
free flow of input from all.
And we looked at the question of
PERFORMANCE ... is performance a
relevant part of contact improvisation?
. .. is it appropriate to put the work
out for audiences to see? One answer
was Steve Paxton's comment, "Yes.
For me, performing is the reward you
get for being allowed to handle the
idea."
Performance is putting the work into a
domain where other people can respond
to it, where the ideas & forms will be
examined and thereby shaped.
In the performance setting, the audi-
ence is bringing a mindset-this helps
bring the evocative power of allegory
and metaphor to the activity of the
dance.
And one of the values of performance
in improvisation to me is simply the
looking for ways to shape the work-
( or have the Work shape itself) into a
self-complete form, being able to tran-
scend the realm of research and move
into the realm of .... at least some-
thing which is enjoyable for people to
watch, participate in through watching
and reacting, through the natural use
of metaphor-putting their life into
action-out there, and providing for
the audience, just through the sheer
pleasure of the movement, the oppor-
tunity for them to relate to ....
WEIGHT
rising and falling
floating
diving
up
rushing
bouncing
hang-gliding
jagged free jazzing
So in the dancing (as well as in consid-
ering the direction the work as a whole
is t~king) it's all about "being able to
be m the spaces of uncertainty & am-
biguity with confidence ... "
We were considering the question,
"What is contact improvisation?," and
Nancy's comment was, "a group like
this preserves the recipe."
The work is, and will become, what
we bring to it.
THIS COMMUNITY IS EXPLORING
ITSELF. i:l
TEACHING SCORE 2
TRIO CONTACT POINT: Sharon Tomsky
A trio score. Three people in contact. One in the middle-touching both
of the outside people. The 2 outside people are not touching each other-
but they are dancing together. (Looking at each other is useful.) The person
in the middle is the "point of contact" between them. The communicator
the sender of messages; transferring information back and forth-simultane'-
ously receivin.g & sen~ing information, about the contact-weight, pressure, etc.
The place in the middle seems to be a real different place for people to
dance from. Goin~ into a place ~f no-mi~d perhaps. Or no ego. Learning
ab~ut wha~ the pornt of c~ntact 1s .. outs~de people learning about communi-
catin.g. Bein~ clear. R~lating. Stay1.ng with the other person. Listening.
Sensing. Paying attention to the point of contact. (I learned this exercise
from john LeFan.)
{From the 7 986 Breitenbush jam & Teacher's Conference notebook]
Volume 1 2 1987
CQICI Sourcebook ll5
Paul Langland dancing at Paula Cooper Gallery, NYC.
116 CQ/CI Sourcebook
FREELANCING WITH CONTACT
by Paul Langland
This piece was written in 1979. We
discovered it in our files and found the
issues in it still very much alive. We
talked with Paul about it and be agreed.
He also noted that shortly after this
period, performances of improvisation
in New York City seemed to disappear
for several years. [Eds.]
I suspect there are many
people presently involved in moving
art forms who, except for exposure to
contact improvisation, would not have
entered the field. My experience is a
case in point. As an art major in col-
lege, I enjoyed creating large sculptural
environments for the body. The
weight and awkwardness of the mater-
ials, plywood, two-by-fours, and other
construction hardware, turned building
a piece into a physical work-out.
Sculpting was an arranging dance,
using the whole body.
During this time (1973), Curt Sid-
dall, Nita Little, Steve Paxton, Nancy
Stark Smith, and someone whom I re-
member well except for her name
[Karen Radler] came to perform and
teach contact on the west coast for
the first time. I danced some and
watched a lot. The idea of people
presenting natural movement as a
performance was a pleasant jolt to me.
The democratic give and take between
partners was appealing. Improvising
dance, creating while performing was,
for me, a revelation. And my person-
ality was more comfortable with the
social circumstances of dancing than
the solitude of sculpture.
My first dancing was suffused with
comparisons between sculpture and
contact. It was as if the four-by-eight
plywood sheets I had been building
with developed power steering, and
could even lift me off the ground.
photo© 1978 Leslie Cerier
Volume 12 1987
The three-dimensional experience of
sculpture became four-dimensional,
the fourth dimension being the time
of the dance. I was no longer the
manipulator. For every impulse of
mine, there was another independent
nervous system deciding what was hap-
pening as well. I saw that contact is
very purely about process. In terms
of sculpture, that meant showing how
fascinating it is to make a piece, rather
than showing a finished piece.
Through performing, I like letting
others in on the creating side of the
work, the side most interesting to me.
Since that time, I've performed in
many different situations; contact,
other improvised structures, and set
pieces. In watching dance or perform-
ing it, I'm drawn to dancing which
doesn't impose a style on the people
who dance. This may partly be a
hangover from art training which en-
courages students to find an individual
vision from the start of training. I'm
glad this idea has a lot of credence in
the dance world now.
Improvisation is one way of work-
ing individualistically either in a group
or solo. A problem is that improvisa-
tion and performance are sometimes
friends. We all know of our on nights
and our off nights. Those who perform
improvisation have decided that the
pluses outweigh the minuses. The
pluses are that the dancers are present-
ing a raw slice of life, uncut, uncooked.
The audience's position is elevated be-
cause they are allowed to get in on the
whole story as it happens for the first
time. They aren't watching something
which has been edited in rehearsal.
Improvisation is risky and often re-
warding for the performers. It is a way
for performers to move on with work,
not to stick with an image or sequence
Volume 1 2 1987
"What did you think of what you saw, asked Miss Stein . ..
Only that Picassos were rather awful and the others were not.
Sure, she said, as Pablo once remarked, when you make a thing,
it is so complicated making it that it is bound to be ugly, but
those that do it after you they don't have to worry about making
it and they can make it pretty, and so everybody can like it
when the others make it."
Gertrude Stein
which must be repeated several times.
The formal qualities of contact make
it a focused and grounded improvisa-
tional technique. There is a basic
agreement between performers which
provides a continual springboard into
the dance. A performer of contact has
a lot of freedom.
I'm sitting here writing about how
good a performance improvisation
makes, and resisting tooth and nail the
detractions. However, there are some.
There is no overall structure to control
the impact of the performance. It's
like having several small dances linked
together. Dull repetition can be a
problem. When this happens, it's like
watching the same rehearsed dance
several times in one piece. This is one
of the main limitations in previous
dance work which many of us are try-
ing to avoid by investigating improvi-
sation. An ideal piece has few seams
showing. There are a lot of ways to
approach this, but they mostly have to
do with pre-planning. It's difficult to
achieve in an improvised performance.
There also are some beautiful possibili-
ties in pre-setting a piece; it can have
long sections of synchronized move-
ment, it can be a story, it can have
special timing, or it can deal with the
personae and not the personality of
the performer. The search for these
qualities is improvised but their presen-
tation is, for the most part, set.
Safety is important in contact.
This results in contact being playful,
game-like, and positive. There is a
utopian communal quality to contact-
a great experience but not the whole
picture. This one-keyed quality can be
limiting for an audience, and make
performing frustrating. There is little
room to explore subjects like discord,
tragedy, or events which are fantastic
or grotesque. Sometimes I want to
entertain/be entertained with these
rich images. Sometimes I want the
purity and abstraction of contact.
When I perform contact, I like to
feel that we, the performers, are shar-
ing the performance with the audience.
Among the most satisfying perform-
ances in this respect was a series done
at the Paula Cooper Gallery in New
York City [1978). We performed in
the afternoon for three days, three
hours per day. The audience was free
to come and go. Those who stayed
wanted to be there. As the perform-
ance progressed, the size and closeness
of the audience increased. Neither the
audience nor the piece was set. There
was a cumulative effect from perform-
ing for a long time for three days in a
row. Our dancing became very sure,
and many audience members returned
two or three times to watch. By the
end of the third day we all felt like
good friends. We felt like the home
team.
In the last year, I've been doing
contact wearing different costumes.
The costumes put a context into the
dancing. Nina Martin and I did cos-
tumed contact as part of a living sculp-
ture exhibit at the Susan Caldwell
Gallery. Every half-hour or so, we
changed clothes. We danced in paja-
mas, swimming suits, winter clothes,
formal attire, and disco polyester. The
costumes interest me because they
provide a lasting image, however weird,
of what the dancing is about. A sub-
liminal story unfolded with each
change. (Paul and Nina went to the
prom all dressed up. They felt good
and started rolling on top of each
other. Nina's hat got squashed, so she
_,.
CQICI Sourcebook 117
[Statement written by Steve Paxton, ca. 1977]
There is currently some controversy in
Canada: is CONTACT IMPROVISA-
TION a performance art?
Contact Improvisation is determined
by two people at once, who both im-
provise freely, trying not to impede
the work of the other. Spectators
watch a physical conversation which
may range from stillness to high athlet-
icism. The reasons for the change in
scale of movement or any other
changes can be analyzed from emotion-
al, physical or psychological levels. ?r
many levels at once. The spectator 1s
watching real people pressed by events
and time. It is improvisation. Neither
participant is totally in or out of con-
trol. The spectator does not look
through the performers to a mind and
its aesthetics. One looks squarely at
the performers and their choices, reac-
tions, and instincts, to what happens
between them.
What is revealed is mutual under-
standing, a basic system, a mode of
communication. Touch. The fast and
subtle skin processing masses, vectors,
emotions, giving the muscles the in-
formation to correctly move the bones,
so the duet can fall through the time
and space of demonstration, neither
partner hurt, hampered, subjected, ob-
jectified.
Is it performance art? Performance
has several levels of meaning. So does
art. No one is defining their terms.
They seem to mean, "I didn't enjoy
the way it went," or, "If Tharp is, this
ain't. " No matter. Go to it, Canadian
Critics. Get it on conceptually. Or
you could take a way out devised by
those who perform Contact Improvisa-
tion .... they call it an art-sport.
Steve Paxton
118 CQ/CI Sourcebook
threw it away while climbing on Paul's
back. They both fell into the buffet
table, pensively. When the music
started, Paul rolled up Nina's body and
she supported him upside down with
his jacket wrapped around his head.)
Someone else may be having other
daydreams as they watch. Our only
plan was to do contact after putting
on the different clothes, not to inject
the movement itself with any plot or
meaning. The dancing did feel very
different each time we changed, mostly
because the physical sensations of each
outfit were so different. Winter
clothes to swimming suits was a big
change. As at the Paula Cooper Gal-
lery, the audience could come and go.
We felt very connected to the audience
that stayed with us. Long perform-
ances are satisfying. We had a long
time to allow the dancing to grow and
change. Where we got the stamina tq
do a three hour duet, I don't know.
Solo space is something I want to
see and do more of. It's a way for in-
dividual eccentricities to come out.
Voice work, props, or other movement
forms are possible without being filter-
ed through that great equalizer, the
contact duet.
Contact ideas have been used as
parts of different dance performances
very successfully. Often I think of
contact as a technique, or resource,
rather than the thing to be performed.
Here are just a few of the ways I liked
contact being incorporated. In Simone
Forti's Planet,.Terry O'Reilly and
David Taylor did a low, slow, slither-
ing contact duet with intermittent
pauses based on reptilian movement
while other animal-inspired dancing
was happening at the same time. In
Meredith Monk/Ping Chong's Chacon,
Eli Pollock did a contact solo as the
basis for his role as a drunken or crazy
villager. Mary Overlie's The Figure has
a section of "spatial contact"; dancing
mostly without touching, but reacting
to external sensing, and developing a
flow with a partner(s). Last year, at
the Contact Quarterly benefit in New
York City, about twenty different
contact pieces were shown. The varie-
ty was tremendous. There was a lot
of experimenting and potential.
Contact is democratic. Performers
have equal opportunities in perform-
ance which, for me, is one of its great
attractions. This equality shows in
performance. The round robin form,
and the freedom to start and stop
dancing when you want is politically
healthy for us humans. All contactors
have a decision-making role as they
dance, becoming their own directors.
I have performed frequently in
companies with directors, especially
with Meredith Monk. What the direc-
tor/company situation offers is greater
specificity and depth of vision. The
work process in The House (Meredith's
company) is interesting. She frequent-
ly sketches out what to work on. We
improvise and then set the most suit-
able material during rehearsal. Then
work is further edited, or expanded
and arranged with the other material
in the piece. There are often sections
of structured improvisation. In creat-
ing and performing, each performer
has some responsibility as author,
director, and actor.
My thoughts on performance are
open ended. Performing contact is
rewarding, and there is an audience
for it. It's reminiscent of a sports
event minus the competition; the
focus is on the moment to moment
interplay of individuals rather than the
outcome. A set piece offers other pos-
sibilities, both as performer and viewer.
The two don't exclude each other. I
hope the' multiplicity of performing
possibilities continues to thrive and
cross-fertilize. 1::
drawing: Margit Weichert
Volume 12 1987
CALIFORNIA
HARBIN HOT SPRINGS
CONTACT JAM
The first CALIFORNIA HARBIN HOT SPRINGS CONTACT JAM was real good.
I hod a nice time. A lot of people come from where /live-the Bay Area-but some from
Chico, one from Boulder and a few from other West Coast towns.
Being a newcomer to the contact community, I felt unfamiliar with what a jam
was supposed to be. You know, I hod read some earlier issues of CQ, taken a couple
classes from N. S. Smith at Wesleyan U., even did some Cl in NYC at PS122. But, going
away for a long weekend with complete strangers to bathe in hot pools and dance didn't
exactly make me feel at home, or at ease.
What was the purpose of a jam, besides a reunion for those who hod already been
practicing the form for awhile? I could tell there were some of us who were new to this
kind of situation and didn't know precisely what was going on. This initial awkward
time reminded me of my first high school dance.
About everyone agreed that music and dance should be present (but separate
some of the time) during the weekend. A lot of us, including myself, were interested in
not setting particular times for dancing and drumming or even bedtime. Someone re-
marked that the time might be felt organically.
At first, not a lot of time was spent collectively breathing or arriving. "Plunging
in" is what seemed to be the desire of many. Maybe the hot springs pools provided the
springboard for this desire. I couldn't join the flow, though, because plunging in is a
fear of mine. I needed to toke time to sit and think and tune into myself for what I
wanted from this jam.
We were in a completely new world at Harbin, a rustic 7000 mile woodland,
mountainous tree-lined areas volleying and rising oil around our enclosed dance shelter.
A small brook ran by with clear water from the Napa Valley (wine country here in
California). But with oil that beautiful natural environs, it was still troubling to me not
knowing the jam boundaries. What were the rules of the game, as they soy? I sow possi-
bilities in group sex, a homosexual and heterosexual couples' scene, raucous contact,
soft-eye dancing, rolling and breathing.
All this stuff I felt Friday night or so. Then, on Saturday morning, things opened
up. Some of the senior members of the group taught half-hour mini-courses in Contoct-
esque basics and new discoveries. I went up to the pools in the afternoon. It wosn 't so
bod there. It was softer and quieter than in the dance shelter. Hazy and lazy, strong
and light, mole and female, folks were just chatting and healing. Four of us novice con·
tocters huddled our arms together in the pool and floated around like a spinning wheel.
We talked about what we sow Friday night. To my surprise, we shored a lot of common
observations. Then, we steamed in the hottest tub. We walked out ofter\\·ords, my
bones felt heavy and my muscles suspended around my bones.
On Saturday night, .the jam got together in a circle to discuss the moi•ement of
the weekend. While people talked, someone tossed small coloriul ploybolls bock and
forth in the circle. It looked like a game of marbles. You would toss a boll into the
center and someone would try to knock yours out of the center and onto the periphery.
Then, I forget who rolled herself into the center as a human marble. People giggled and
rolled her around. Others joined her. That beautiful stock of 64 pillows by the \\·all
become the next marbles, and a huge and monstrous pillow fight ensued. Finale: a dive
bombing affair.
Pillow rumble, it was real good. A lot of heavy stuff. Straight, bold and big
strides over obstacles into the pile of tossed pillows. The rest of the weekend was fun.
I think we, as a group of disparate individuals, discoi·ered our challenge: a common
ground. I think we also discovered a commitment: on organic message. To me, it was
on unfurling of the foll, a movement outward and down across the floor. As I spoke
with someone on Sunday afternoon on the trail bock from our lost dip in the pool, I
felt a return.
Andrew Clibanoff
Volume 1 2 1987
CQICI Sourcebook 119
One of nine studios at the Theaterschool (TMDD) in Amsterdam.
by Aat Hougee
translated by Leab Jacob
It is roughly 5 years ago that in
the curriculum of the Modern Dance
Department of the Theaterschool
(TMDD) in Amsterdam, Holland, the
subject of composition was replaced,
without too much discussion, with the
concept of 'improvisation'. It was not
just a matter of altering the name, but
a conclusion brought about by the
department's gradually changing vision
of the function and content of the
process of composition within dance
education.
In the department's eyes, the con.
cept of 'composition' had become too
static a hea:ding to apply to a subject
that actually is at the core of its teach-
ing-the search for new forms. As it
had recently been taught in our school,
'composition' appeared to take for
granted a correct and incorrect way, a
belief that compositional truths already
existed. Thus, for educators, it seemed
artistically more interesting to busy
oneself with the process that leads to
a form than with the results of a pro-
cess undergone by other people at
120 CQICI Sourcebook
other times.
'Improvisation' as a concept, it
seemed, (though we were at that point
unable to comprehend all the implica-
tions), had more to do with this ex·
plorative organic approach. In fact, in
the course of time, it came to embody
a rich variety of aspects and possibili-
ties, challenging the whole teaching
field with its far-reaching influence.
Mostly as a result of Pauline de
Groot's work, the department takes as
its starting point the view that develop-
ing into a dancer means developing in-
to an artist. This creative development
can in no way be set apart from the
young dancer's growing physical capa-
bilities. This premise means that in
every movement class the student is
being asked to arrive at a physical
shape by tapping his/her own creative
resources, even in those classes where
the movement form is provided by the
teacher. The idea of making use of
the student's own potential is in fact
a very obvious starting point, but it
does demand a certain attitude from
the student, a state of being that is
open. Especially in this area of attain-
ing a 'state of mind' enabling further
Volume 12 1987
physical and creative development, a
variety of improvisational forms can
play an important role in teaching.
The department views as a cohesive
whole the making of work, the train-
ing that leads to this, and the person's
physical/creative development. It is a
complex process of growth, with the
achievement of form through essential-
ly investigative methods of working as
its continual starting point. It is also
true, within the process of composi-
tion, that methods arising from moving
are more efficient and achieve more
logical results than most that stem
from a more static and dogmatic view
of composition. Improvisation repre-
sents an approach applicable to almost
every aspect of teaching: it is investi-
gative; allows, while practicing, an
overview of what is possible; and
teaches one to make choices. This
weaving of improvisation methods
through the whole of teaching-across
a much wider area than simply compo-
sitional techniques-has, in a way, led
to some confusion: which improvisa-
tion methods should be employed,
when, and to what purpose?
The TMDD has tried several times
to plan more effectively by drawing up
a list of approaches and goals. These
arose on the one hand out of the vari-
ous approaches to improvisation
launched, in a somewhat intuitive
way, by the department directors in
their choice of certain teachers over
that last few vears, and on the other,
out of the ai~s of the teaching faculty.
Looking down this list, it very quickly
becomes obvious that what can be
designated by a general heading is
limited: most improvisation forms
(still) seem to be intrinsically bound
with the particular teacher, and this
would seem to be more or less charac-
teristic of the phenomenon of improv-
isation. At first, wc tried to make dis-
tinctions along the lines of improvisa-
tion forms that had already been
taught by the TMDD faculty and
various guest artists, with the ultimate
thought that from such a list it should
Volume 1 2 1987
be possible to arrive at a logical frame-
work which would remain, as far as
possible, the same through successive
groups of students and over a period
of four years.
In theory, we could make the
following distinctions: (1) physical
improvisation, (2) associative improv-
isation, (3) improvisation from struc-
tures, ( 4) improvisation from creative
imagery.
Although such a list can certainly
stimulate interesting discussions and a
theoretical elaboration of it would un-
doubtedly yield material for further
inquiry, for the purposes of education
this approach has not contributed
much more than the conclusion that,
to a greater or lesser extent, the
aspects listed are intrinsically part of
most improvisational working methods.
It isn't yet possible to distill a clear
program description of classes.
Another type of categorization
would probably provide more starting
points, namely one in which there is a
distinction between improvisation as a
means to an end and improvisation as
an end in itself. Here too it isn't a
black and white distinction that is be-
ing suggested but reference points on a
sliding scale: at the one end, improvi-
sation methods used as a bridge
towards developing physically/creative-
ly; or towards working choreographi-
cally; and at the other end, improvisa-
tion as ultimate artistic goal.
It seems possible to establish a pro-
gram for working with improvisation
over a 4-year course, making a distinc-
tion analogous to that above and con-
structed according to this sliding scale.
But looked at more methodically, it
still defied completion. Especially
with regard to 'improvisation as ulti-
mate goal' there seems to be little
systematic material available. Probably
because, in this area, the personality
and vision of the teachers concerned
seem to have to play a decisive role.
Earlier in this article it was men-
tioned that improvisational working
methods have been slowly impregnat-
ing all aspects of teaching at the TMDD.
Through experience, we realized in the
department that in order for this inte-
gration to occur, two important condi-
tions had to be in place.
In the first place, this work requires
students who are willing and able to
take as a starting point in the learning
process their capabilities and limita-
tions, just as it requires teachers who
take as a starting point in their teach-
ing not the form they have chosen,
but the process leading to a form. For
students and teachers alike it is impor-
tant to have the courage to keep on
searching for new truths which in the
course of time will not appear to be
true anymore. Without an under-
standing that one's end goal shifts the
further one explores, working using
improvisation does not seem to be
possible. Those necessary changes in
attitude, with their accompanying
conflicts, have characterized the recent
development of the TMDD and will
probably characterize the development
of any institution that makes this edu-
cational, artistic (and political) choice.
In the second place, on the level of
day-to-day experience with the process
of improvisation, an open 'state of
mind' is needed. (Of course, this
openness is also required when work-
ing from more form-oriented methods,
but in that case if one's concentration
is broken, the form of the material of-
fers something to go by, if unsteady.)
Although at first the department took
the view that this 'state of mind' has
to be built up anew at every lesson,
the conviction has recently grown
that by structuring one's teaching in
a certain way, one can work towards
a physical and psychical condition
from which one can improvise without
having to go through a long prepara-
tory process each time.
CQICI Sourcebook 121
Should the above give th<;.impres-
sion that improvisation within dance
education is gradually becoming a
known quantity, the following para-
graphs point out a few areas in which
my opinions urgently need further
exploration.
When working with improvisation,
the student's personal contribution to
the material becomes central. In other
words, this is an approach that recog-
nizes the necessary connection be-
tween being an artist and being free as
a person. But, at the same time, this
starting point also carries a limitation:
by stressing personal involvement,
there is the danger that the limitations
of one's own vocabulary will be in-
completely challenged and broken
through, or that the initial physical
sensations resulting from working with
improvisational forms will become the
end goal: the stereotypes of the new-
est form of dance. For that reason,
teachers try and set themselves the
task of developing methods which will
encourage the student through contin-
ual exploration to break through and
widen his/her own vocabulary.
Where improvisation is handled as
a choreographic methodology, the
dancer/choreographer tries to make the
material found through improvisation
repeatable. This process of developing
physical memory seems to be protract-
ed and intensive. If one really tries to
use improvisation as a form for per-
formance then one is going even a step
further. In making such a perform-
ance repeatable, it should be possible
to anticipate those decisions which
enable the form to be repeated, while
ensuring that the process of change
continues.
When using improvisation as a work
form, one should pay attention to its
compositional aspects. With many
improvisation approaches, the empha-
sis seems to be on physical experience
and its consequent personal expres-
sion. In itself a logical first step, it is
also obviously necessary to work on
an awareness of 'form' over a long
period of time, so as not to have to
fall back on conventional composition-
al laws.
Finally, there is the problem of
assessment: when teachers chose not
to use known forms in teaching move-
ment and composition, we had to ask
ourselves how to give the student
satisfactory feedback about his/her
progress. A judgement in terms of
good or bad usually turns out to be
difficult and also undesirable. In
practice, a judgement seems either not
to be forthcoming, or to be closely
bound up with the vision and experi-
ence of the teacher concerned.
Working with improvisation means
taking risks, by both student and
teacher, and continuing to search while
treading a path which over the first few
yards is possibly smooth-but each
time a stretch is covered, the effect of
each step turns out to be incalculable.
And so finally, it would still be pos-
sible to distill a 'system' from all this
material on offer, except for the fact
that we have to consider teachers
whose teaching methods are necessarily
bound to their own creative develop-
ment, and this is just as unpredictable
as that of the student. Furthermore,
I would like to suggest that in fact
improvisation within the framework
of teaching dance depends on a mutual
interaction in physical/creative devel-
opment between student and teacher,
which is an area that cannot be system-
atized. And the processes and methods
which evolve from these interactions
can only be partly objectified.
A healthy dance teaching profession
should not be unhappy to belong to
this aliveness. *
Parking in front of the school.
122 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume12 1987
2nd EUROPEAN CONT ACT TEACHERS CONFERENCE
a report by Christine Gaigg
2nd European Contact Teachers Conference
November 18-21 , 1986
Theaters.chool, Modern Dance Department
Amsterdam, Holland
Participants: Meret Schlegel, Christine Goigg, Doniel Trenner, Lindo Forsman, Jacqueline
de Vries, Wolfgang Grof, Mork Tompkins, Howard Sonenklor, Moniek van der Look,
Doniel Lepkoff, Andrew Horwood, Pierre Riou, Bob Rease, Pauline de Groot, Pierre
Serophin, Suzanne .Cotto, jean Bloch-Laroque, Stephen Crowford, Lucio Walker, Koren
Nelson, Alita Alessi, Bruno Stefononi, Elinor Rodeff, Margot Rijven, Nancy Stork Smith,
Kirstie Simson, Renate Muller, Wolter Weiler, Cathie Caraker, Gonne Kooy1 Nien Mari Chotz
The first meeting on Tuesday evening
was impressive. After introducing ourselves
and talking about the schedule (prepared by
Elinor, Renate and Cathie, who had organ·
ized the conference), we came together for
dancing. I was happy in the very plain
meaning of the word. Happy, because I
could dance with people without demon-
strating anything in terms of teaching, with-
out thinking about the next step in leading
a class. There is this underlying structure
I am dreaming of, there is this language
spoken so well, that you can make poems.
The room was filled with the atmosphere of
light and easy dancing.
We began the next morning with a warm·
up led by Nancy, focusing on the questions:
What do I need to get ready to dance with
another person? How do I know what? Do
I teach the other what I need? (The motiva-
tion for dancing: just a topic for teachers in
their daily life.) The day got heavier, guided
by a dense schedule we were not really able
to fulfill. On the evening before, there had
been at least ten people interested in teach-
ing at this conference; now there was nobody.
So, instead of co-teaching (which was set on
the schedule), we gave brief personal reports
of our work, one by one in the circle. Many
issues were presented, but at that time we
were not ready to pick them up for further
discussions. (For example: falling as a need
for giving up the image of yourself; realness
of Contact; the help of aikido, tai-chi, medi-
tation and body-work; to look what is
beyond the form; relationship between
ground and space.)
The afternoon was spent with CO-
TE ACHING: three people share the time
(two hours) with or without connetting
their material. It does not mean to find
something new, but to give the chance to
look at how other teachers teach. This time,
Bruno worked with sounds leading to Con-
tact. Pierre treated the left side of our bodies
including our vision and ended up (surpris-
ingly) with cart-wheels. Moniek then went
from personal movement into group-improv-
isation, followed by open dance. People
were kind of uneasy or ungrounded. Later
we tried to find out why. Someone observed
that we were "bad" students. We felt that
we were confused by Pierre's sudden change
of direction and by the different teachings.
Moniek got nervous when she realized that
her intentions did not work out. A small
"accident" happened, but nobody was hurt,
and the open dance was exciting to watch.
{There was no "feedback" scheduled but
we found time for it in the very last discus-
sion on Friday, and got to some interesting
points .... One was the issue of how to deal
with accidents in class: to pay attention to
the hurt person, according to the situation;.
to pay attention to the partner as well, be-
cause he might feel guilty; a teacher can
get feedback for their teaching by remem-
bering the energy in the room when an
accident happened.)
We left for dinner on the first day with-
out a clear plan for the evening activity-
somehow confused and very tired. Many
people thought it was because of the talking
(which was actually listening), or, because
of the dense structure, or what? Some peo·
pie began to already participate only part-
time. Other people found this attitude dis-
turbing. This evening almost nobody came.
The second day began with co-teaching.
Karen and Alito led the warm-up: first
taking turns watching your partner's breath
(who is lying on the floor), then doing a
warm-up dance together and talking about
it afterwards. Danny Trenner then led us
through exercises where we sang contra-
puntal jazz rhythms in two groups while
doing contact, to learn to work with an
external rhythm while improvising, without
being disturbed by it.
After tea-break, we started our first dis·
cussion: the essence of teaching; different
cultures; contact in performance; problems
of teaching. The suggestion of splitting into
smaller groups was made but not accepted:
there was either no need to split at that
moment, or, more likely, there was the fear
of missing something being discussed else·
where. We got into a constructive discus-
sion about TEACHERS' AND STUDENTS'
ROLES. Unlike the martial arts, where the
master-role is very clear, the teacher-role in
Contact Improvisation can be confusing.
But, as a teacher, instead of being over-
whelmed by a student's fantasies and pro-
jections, you can receive their energy and
give it back. Also, if you don't take a stu-
dent's aggression or resistance too personal-
ly, you can break the psychological cycle.
On the other hand, you do have to find a
way to work with difficult students. You
cannot avoid conflicts. The whole psycho-
logical situation in a class can be like Con-
tact Improvisation itself: give and receive
weight and transform energy.
The after-lunch co-teaching was done by
Stephen, Mark, and Kirstie. In the begin·
ning, Stephen worked with being absolutely
dead and then responding to your partner's
leading. Mark talked about one's habits {Do
they work with this partner?) and how de-
cisions are made in the dance. Kirstie had
us centered and did some Ki-testing. At the
end, they experimented with teaching their
material simultaneously to the whole group,
leaving us in a chaos.
This evening, after having dinner together
at the school, we went into the NETWORK-
ING DISCUSSION, an important part of the
conference. The discussion was dominated
Volume 1 2 1987
by finding a place and an organizer for the
next conference. Will there be a next one?
How do we prepare it? It was a hot discus-
sion, at least for those who participated
verbally. For many of us, the English was
too fast and the statements were not related
enough to each other. Some were interested
in just a jam and others were not interested
in open dancing at all. But to find out what
was most important in a teachers conference
for the whole group was just impossible.
Some quarreling gathered around the
question of how structured a conference
should be in terms of prepared topics, etc.
Looking back, I think that we somehow felt
that the "teaching exchange" focus of this
year's confe"rence didn't really work, the
co-teaching was not convenient to every-
body, there was not enough open dancing,
and not enough time to meet people person-
ally, all at the same time. And the confer-
ence will be over within the next day! But
we could see clearly that a group-process is
a group-process and cannot be compressed
into one evening of talking about the sched-
ule, but has to take place.
By a vote we defined: all want another
conference, three-quarters want more un·
scheduled time. We agreed on two days of
jam to get to know each other and to arrive,
and three days of conference. We define
ourselves as a support-group, but we can deal
with a technical conference too. Also, the
spirit of a conference is dependent on the
organizer.
Another conflict arose because of Euro·
peans and Americans discussing European
networking. One difficulty of this mix {in
other aspects quite constructive) is the dif·
ferent ways of communicating: the strong
output of American participants vs. the
European's preference for listening. More-
over, we Europeans have to stay in our cities
to keep something going on, (and are not
travelling around Europe giving workshops
as much). We are still relying on each other;
we have to. This is why the next day we
made a gathering of European teachers
(people who are settled in Europe and teach
here) to talk about practical network.
In that meeting, we agreed that it had
been necessary for the first two conferences
to invite somebody (i.e. Nancy) who is very
well known and experienced. Her most
valuable function has not been so much her
attraction to get people to the conference,
but her catalyzing presence. Yet, we will try
to make it without special invitations next
time and try to share the responsibility
equally among everyone. On the practical
level, we decided to meet next year not in a
city but in a house in the countryside, which
means meeting in the summertime. Three
people volunteered to take responsibility, to
ensure a gathering would happen. [See
'Notices' in this Newsletter for details about
next conference.] The networking was
understood as a real supportive one, not only
in terms of teaching, but also as an exchange
of performances and projects, ideas. This is
the formal structure, the rest of it has to be
developed in personal relationships.
The European communication is still
arranged through the NEWSLETTER, co-
ordinated each time by a different person.
We ended the conference with a final
round robin and a party. We felt we have
awakened potential connections all over
Europe, seen that teaching problems get
less dramatic when discussing them, and
inspired each other through our dance~.
See you next year.
Ci
::l
CQICI Sourcebook 123
DOLPHIN DANCE
by Lisa Gottlieb-Clark
The first time I danced contact it was in a dream:
filtered light, heaviness in my lungs, another's weight and
breath rolling against my back, blood pulsing in my ears.
Seven years later, my dream came true.
Cold and shivering in the murky water of a small lagoon I
dive and turn, hearing my breath in my ears, diaphragm
constricted, straining to see a long grey form swimming
lazpy below me. I come to the surface for air, my breath
exploding in a burst. I breathe in deep and dive below
again. After a few minutes of swimming I feel my skin
beginning to warm. I stretch my limbs in the water, let-
ting the physical movement calm me. The energy moves
down out of my head and into my heart. I feel my heart-
beat regulate and my breath softening. My attention
turns to the sounds around me, mostly clicking and tril-
ling. What I sense is that sound in the water has a great
deal of movement. The noises bounce and vibrate below
the surface. Suddenly I feel a nudge against the back of
my knees, and turning I look into the eyes of a large
smooth skinned dolphin. He opens his long mouth in a
wide grin and the sound that comes from the blow hole on
the top of his head is surprisingly like a human laugh. In
turn I laugh back, amazed, and find myself with a mouth-
ful of salty water. I surface again for air and quickly dive
below again. Moving slowly towards him under the water
I keep my arms at my sides to appear less threatening, and
brush against his smooth back with my chest and belly.
The dolphin gently grabs my arm in his.mouth. It is an
odd sensation, having this huge mammal hold me between
bis 88 teeth (same as a piano, but that's a different story).
Knowing this is a sign of friendship I try and hold still un-
til he releases me. His mouth feels like the grasp of a small
child's fingers. Feeling like it is my turn to make a move I
reach for the dorsal fin in the middle of his back and hold
on tight to catch my first dolphin ride. The dorsal fin
feels very firm. It is like a smooth, rubber covered, trian-
gular shaped tree branch. It isn't slippery at all; on the
contrary, my hand feels like it is touching a wet piece of
solid rubber. We are side by side, under the surface, as the
dolphin pulls me through the water. We both come up for
air, dive again and then I notice on my other side a slightly
smaller dolphin. I reach over with my free hand and grab
the dorsal fin, arms extended, racing through the water I
124 CQ/CI Sourcebook
feel like I'm flying. Feeling the water's friction pulling
against my skin I imitate the undulating motion of the
dolphins. This second dolphin is a female, and she is hap-
py to join us. We twist, dive, nudge and explore the
similarities and differences ·in the way we move.
When I first danced contact I dreamed about it often. At
first I thought it was because I was learning something new
and it was occupying my thoughts in my waking hours.
As I remembered more of my dreams I realized dreaming
contact was a way for me to dance contact without the
usual limitations of a wakeful dance. I could move and
dance in complete 3-dimensional space. In my contact
dreams I had no horizon to limit or guide me.
I feel this freedom in the water with these two lovely,
graceful creatures. I am aware of a dream-like quality to
our water dancing. We spin and chase, touqb and push,
arching and tumbling, ignoring for once gravity and its
constant demand. I feel an exhilarating freedom in this
original and most basic liquid. They are home in it. I am
just a visitor, very aware of my smaller lungs and lack of
endurance, yet they welcome me and honor my limita-
tions. I fill my lungs again and dive, following their
shadowy forms swimming ahead of me. They turn and
wait, and as I catch up they separate slightly so that I am
in the middle between them. We all come up for air, and
they stay, bobbing in the water next to me. My husband
and daughter ca11 a greeting to me from the shore and I
start to swim towards them. The male dolphin quickly
moves in front of me, blocking my way, while his female
friend nudges me back into deeper water. I am mostly
surprised, a little frightened to find myself in a dolphin
sandwich without a lot of movement possibilities. How
do I convey Time-Out? Breathing deep I center my
weight and push outwards with my arms as I duck below
the surface and head out into the direction they were
pushing me. They surface next to me, one in front and
the other behind me. I tread water and laugh outloud.
I'm incredulous and pleased that they want to keep me in
the water. I feel like a dolphin play-thing. I reach out
with my arms, twisting myself slightly, and grab bold of
their dorsal fins. We all take a breath and we're off again,
a dolphin on either side of me. We make a large circle of
the lagoon and then they start towards shore. We are
diving and surfacing, diving and surfacing, sunlight shining
on the water, the salty breeze, my daughter laughing and
clapping her little bands. Diving and surfacing, two
dolphins and a woman making brief contact, making a
dream-like dance. -ti
rubber-stamp by Gottlieb-Clark
Volume 12 1987
I
• IS ...
..c
u
@
0
0
..c
CL
Steve Paxton performing. London, 1980.
by Steve Paxton
The arts can be related to the senses, roughly
speaking-music for the ears, painting for the eyes, dance
for the body. But dance suggests an exception, because
in the West it has become a spectator art, and it is through
the eyes that the audience begins a kinetic response, or a
physical empathy with the dancer.
The way the arts relate to the senses gets more and
more complicated to describe when we consider the senses
as interrelating. We notice that the muscles of the eyes
move the visual apparatus to scan and focus. The neck and
torso muscles move the head to expedite the eye move-
ment. We move the whole body through space to look at
sculpture. And we are able to dance on time to music by
virtue of the fact that hearing, which is one of our fastest
sensing systems, drives our kinetic response.
In their creation or execution, the arts are deeply con-
nected to specially trained kinetic systems which, in a
painting for instance, produce not only images, but charac-
teristic strokes and lines. The 'touch' of a musician is as
characteristic.
These are ways of regarding the senses which are far
from the '5 senses' model, which is the way children are
taught about the senses and their perceptions of the world.
And it seems that little is added to this initial picture in
Volume 1 2 1987
CQ/CI Sourcebook 125
the adult popular mind. I have read newspaper articles
about "the 5 senses and the mysterious 6th sense" just
this year. I am not right up to date on the current materi-
al analyzing the senses into all their component bits, but
they were up to about 25 separate senses (each with iden-
tifiable independent nerves) in the late 1970s, which is a
much more interesting number. If you are interested in
other models, read J. J. Gibson's The Senses Considered
As Perceptual Systems, read Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen's
work on Developmental Movement Systems (in past CQs),
investigate the premises of yoga, acupuncture, or any of
the Oriental physical systems which have been imported
into the U.S., and read the provocative and heart-moving
The Man Who Mistook His Wife For A Hat, by Oliver
Sacks. I think we can't have too many models of the
senses and their operation when considering a topic like
improvisation.
It is a bit self-referential to say that the model I'm
working on in this essay is about the effect of models
upon the mind, but I can't see any way around it. I
should mention in this regard that Buddhist thinking in-
cludes the mind as one of the senses. I am fond of that
thought for the questions which arise for the analysts (how
fast do we sense our thought?). If this is an amusing poser
to throw at the sensoral analysts, it is because most of
their work on the senses relates to those of the surface,
disregarding questions about our sense of gravity, our feel-
ing of the muscles of the body when they are quiet, or the
sense of 'being', if I may propose such a sense.
Yet the analysts' labor to discover the special nerves for
each sensoral aspect is of interest, if only to explain the
mechanism which allows us to dance to music, a most
popular form of improvisation. If we can bop at a party
because our perception of sound is faster by 4 milliseconds
than our perception of our limbs' relative positions, we
may surmise something about how the brain interrelates
the senses. We could also look at time itself as a thing
modified by each of the senses, instead of being an objec-
tive measure of duration. In other words, in trying to
describe the sensing of time, we must refer to the percep-
tion of times. These times then must be collated into how
long we think an event took, which is a very complex
computation involving which of the senses experienced
the event.
F9r instance, if we drop an object from a known
height, we have the math to calculate how fast it will be
moving when it hits the floor. This formula indicates that,
barring air resistance, any object increases its rate of falling
constantly. With this mathematical tool, we feel satisfied
that we comprehend the event. It is objectively clear.
However, if we drop a soapy dish and before it smashes
on the floor, manage to catch it, we can appreciate the
sensoral complexity and precision of another point of
view-the subjective feeling of gravity's effect on the dish,
which enables us to save it. We treasure this facility in
sports-eye-hand-body coordination of time, space and
posture getting you there to snag the pop fly.
126 CQICI Sourcebook
I was deeply impressed by seeing a blind woman drop
and catch a plate she was washing. For once, the eyes
didn't have it. It 'makes sense', as the phrase goes, that
our bodies are completely attuned to the gravitic effect-
that the rate a body falls is abundantly obvious to our own
bodies; that any discussion of subjective time should men-
tion the gravitic factor in tuning the human time senses.
And we might as well put in right here yet another
factor, the state of our endocrine system, which can speed
up or retard our experience of these times-just to indicate
how extraordinary a job the brain is doing and to get some
glimpse of how quickly it does it.
"Quickly," compared to what? Ah, "quickly" com-
pared to how long it would take for the conscious mind to
do the job. (This is my conscious mind writing, and I just
wish you knew how long it's taking me to describe the
little I can deduce about what my unconscious mind is
doing.)
a word
Language, a medium in its own right, is deployed to
analyze experiences. Language is either written or spoken.
It is either for the eye or ear, but finally it is intended to
be sensed by portions of the brain which decode sounds or
symbols into meanings. We rely extensively upon it to
communicate what we feel and think. We use it to qualify,
quantify, and confirm and in general to hold our societies
together. It is the major medium, I would estimate. Julian
Jaynes has speculated (in The Origin of Consciousness in
the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind), that consciousness
itself arose with the advent of the written word.
The link of language to consciousness suggests many
avenues for speculation. (It might explain the relative
slowness of conscious thought, for instance.) I think it is
well understood that there is much we experience which
language cannot touch and should not be used for, but it
is such an extraordinary medium that we keep applying it
to all sorts of things, in hopes, perhaps, of contriving a suc-
cessful new formulation; bringing the unconscious, un-
'knowable', or unspeakable into literate consciousness.
I would bet that no dancer ever reviewed, however
positively, has ever felt their dance captured in print. Yet
language, used to describe other arts, forms a very impor-
tant part of what we think about a work of art. It can
certainly influence our point of view and may even suggest
what can be thought about-that is, limit our perception
or experience to the forum encompassed by language. It
does seem to me that if we spend much time communica-
ting with others via language about a painting, music, or a
dance, we accustom our minds to the language version of
the experience.
There are sensible reasons for this. Human societies
deeply appreciate evaluations which, like mining for gold,
mean eliminating dirt and concentrating on what is con-
sidered valuable. Our actual experience of something can
include much that is irrelevant to its evaluation. An apt
Volume 12 1987
evaluation of a work will likely be repeated by others to
their friends. The further it goes from the source of the
experience to a verbal or printed version, the less recourse
we have to elaborations or answers to our questions. We
put such a rendered experience into our own version of a
context. It is an idea we flesh out with our own images.
As such, it has become a fictionalized picture, it has be-
come un-true, but we do it continually.
Much of what we know about ourselves is described to
us via language. The very idea of the 'imagination', for
instance. How did you learn it existed? In many such
respects, we 'imagine' ourselves according to categories,
descriptions, and names of aspects of whatever we are told
(or read) it means to be a hu;nan being. I have a soul, in
other words, because the Bible tells me so. I have an ego
and an id thanks largely to the writings of Freud, and an
anima and animus courtesy of Jung. Not to belabor the
point, we (think we) are conditioned to a considerable
degree by our language.
Not that the particular names, categories and descrip-
tions we apply to ourselves have always been the same nor
will they be used always. They reflect a consensus and
will change or vanish as that consensus changes. Jaynes is
fascinating as he tries to describe the state of the human
mind prior to consciousness. But wc don't have to reach
into the past to grasp some idea of how arbitrary our
notions about ourselves are, we can examine ideas of cul-
tures paralleling our own and feel the disconcerting void
of (our own) recognizable terms of existence.
Language is not only prominent, but it can be coercive.
We may opt to disregard experiences which don't work in
language.
Tom Wolfe wrote a scathing article called "The Painted
Word," wherein he suggests that painters in the NY School
of abstract expressionism were in fact led by the writings
of a few prominent critics to paint as they did. He seemed
to feel that this was a degenerate situation which devalued
the art produced.
It could be said however that this was an exceptional
case of painters and writers developing the ideas of a move-
ment in concert-exceptional in that it was a very intimate
scene with a mix of artists, musicians, dancers and critics
in close communication, and with regular forums for dis-
cussion. Language could then be developed to account for
the paintings at the moment of their creation. What Wolfe
and the rest of us are accustomed to is a 5-to-10 year lag,
to give time for critical language to be invented to describe
the work. When this has been accomplished it has the ef-
fect Wolfe was describing: people learn to imagine in and
with the new concepts, and artists and student artists else-
where paint in the described manner.
One medium may support another, rather like the sen-
soral model: one sense may support another. However, I
have begun to think that one medium cannot accurately
describe another. We are used to the attempt to make
films of novels, and then read critiques in which, to no
one's surprise, the film is found a more or (usually) less
successful 'adaptation'. Films are now 'novelized' to simi-
lar effect. Critiques do not adequately portray the art,
either: it all seems to boil down tCJ "you had to be there."
There are nothing like the real things, whatever version of
'real' we happen to start with.
Analysis of perceptions shows us the realms of 'reality'
we are able to tap with the senses. Seeing, hearing, touch-
ing, smelling, imagining arc, to me, each so very different
from each other, seen subjectively, that I am apt to think
Volume 12 1987
of them as sensoral dimensions. Again, we adapt one di-
mension to another; 'loud' colors, for instance, is an
'auralization' or a sight. But the point here is to notice
how the sensoral dimensions are different, since we are so
used to confirmations of events through their blending.
Watch a carpenter drive nails at close range-eyes see and
ears hear the hammer. Then, move into the distance-eyes
see first .... then ears hear. What we originally felt as one
experience has been divided between the two senses. We
are mildly bemused by the organic 'analysis' we experience.
for somethiNG
In the 1960s there arose an artistic movement called
"mixed media" in which one saw dances, films, language,
etc., used in the same work. Now that I understand the
senses and the mind as 'mixed media', I am very surprised
that the movement got this name. It seems to me that
what was really going on was 'unmixed media', since the
words usually did not relate to the dance or film which did
not relate to each other in familiar ways. The audience
was challenged with an event occurring in several sensoral
dimensions, and the effect was similar to that of the lag
between the visual and aural hammer-at-a-distance. The
mind's habit of synthesizing perceptions was confounded.
This was for me an agreeable aesthetic experience, because
it illuminated ordinary perceptions a bit. It served to train
the mind to examine different modes of sensing, and crea-
ted in the midst of life a new game to play.
As I recall, during that time no one mentioned that the
theater, opera and dance were already 'mixed'. No one
noticed that film had been mixed. Perhaps that was be-
cause people were excited over the possibilities for further
mixes. Sounds emanated from sculptures. Words emanat-
ed from dancers. New mixes occurred even within the
CQICI Sourcebook 127
Steve Paxton teaching. Rome, 1982.
same media: for instance, Bach and Rock together within
a dance performance. Paintings became 3-dimensional,
sculptures were made with new materials such as cloth or
compressed cars. Painters made happenings which were a
kind of theater loaded with colors and shapes and textures
and people and costumes and props; in fact, they were
paintings moving freely into the 3rd and 4th dimensions,
using 'in reality' what before would have been the models
for 2-dimensionaf works.
It was a period of radical interface. We were confronted
with unaccustomed juxtapositions, and of course came to
see things that way.
It was rather different than our former way of seeing
and from this contrast came little sparks of information.
That is how I evaluate it anyway; or value it. When we
have two things to contrast, it seems to cause one to
notice, and to learn. It was difficult to appreciate exactly
what we learned in the complex midst of a happening; I
suppose it all got synthesized in the mind, and one began
to notice things that had escaped notice previously. It led
me to consider the process of learning, and I came to re-
gard the overall experience as a rather powerful conceptual
tool with which one could cause change in experienced
128 CQ)CI Sourcebook
photo ©Carlo Maria Causati
reality.
The question arises, why did we not notice media mixed
before? That is what is so interesting. John Cage had been
doing it for decades, and Duchamp's work suggested it
decades before that. The surrealists seemed to be concoct-
ing mixed media images, and Picabia and Picasso began to
collage-to contrast painted images and real objects, to
sculpt images from found materials.
that can't
Perhaps the answer lies in language. Most folk couldn't
'get it' because they were still quite busy trying to 'get'
what had happened in impressionism and pointilism.
Cubism caused folk further consternation. And who
could includemelting clocks or a urinal or a prepared
piano or a bus ticket in the same conceptual frame? The
critical thought and conceptual tools of the day were
already busily employed elsewhere, and the media did not
dispense images or rationales as quickly as they do now.
Volume 12 1987
The arts, in those days, had begun to change far more
rapidly than our language could accomodate.
During this century it became clear that changes were
occurring on every level more rapidly than before. But
this experience needed time to be finally understood, and
those early examples, such as the more radical examples of
Duchamp, were put aside to accumulate a kind of critical
mass. By 1960, with enough hindsight, the times'-changing
had provided us with the model for the mix, and many
artists were at once ignited. By then the popular media
and critical establishment were ready, and the mixed medi-
um event was considered seriously and widely announced,
after more than half a century gestation period.
Apparently an object doesn't have a life of its own, an
objective meaning, but is imbued with values by the way
we, with our changing minds, evaluate it. For many peo-
ple, an object such as Duchamp's birdcage filled with small
white cubes of marble was not illuminating, but only
absurd. The mix can appear quite empty and gratuitous
unless the mind has some context in which to work with
it. So during the 1960s when so many artists began to
mix images, terms were arrived at to convey the impres-
sions. Then the Duchamp objects were re-evaluated and it
was possible to see them, not as obscure Dada jokes, but
as objects with a particular luminosity, which operate in
some other dimensions of the mind than the linguistic one.
They resolutely resist meaning anything; and as it turned
out, this quality became highly prized in that period of
intense critical and artistic interchange. The laughter
changed from dismissal to delight, and th<i last laugh was
probably Duchamp's.
The special gift of the mixed media was to provide a
contrast to our conventional use of media and the senses.
We had to admit that we did use conventions to convey
our thoughts and feelings, and to run our society at large.
The new mixes indicated that, once in place, conventions
can dictate what the mind will allow itself to think. It
seems to be the nature of the mind, the senses, the body,
and of the society made up of these, to fall into habits,
which are necessary for continuity, aids to individual sur-
vival and collective civilization. Individual habits and col-
lective conventions prod us to adapt what we perceive into
the most convenient shareable mental construct.
From the music we are accustomed to hearing, we form
an idea of the intervals between notes. As our ears become
more educated, we can become quite accurate in reproduc-
ing these intervals. Confronted with music in a different
scale than usual, however, this aural education works
against accurate reproduction. The unfamiliar intervals
will be 'adapted' to the nearest known intervals. This
adjustment is so automatic and unconscious that the person
attempting to reproduce the new intervals will probably
not even realize their mistake.
Given another level of training in the logic of different
musical scales, reproduction becomes possible, if difficult.
For those who don't have such training, being confronted
with an unfamiliar system can lead to confusion. Indian
Volume 12 1987
music, for instance, may remain opaque and possibly even
disturbing; the intervals will seem wrong compared to the
scale we are familiar with. In addition, it will be very dif-
ficult for the person to say why it seems wrong. The result
may be a kind of unease and possible retreat from the un-
familiar system, a sensation of being lost. Not just lost,
but without knowledge of how we are lost, for there are
many dimensions in music where it is possible to go astray.
Under these conditions, a little information about the
nature of the systems is very useful for re-orientation.
However a very different sort of aid is an appreciation
of the feeling of being lost.
Getting lost is possibly the first step toward finding new
systems. Finding parts of new systems can be one of the
rewards for getting lost. With a few new systems, we dis-
cover we are oriented again, and can begin to use the cross
pollination of one system with another to construct ways
to move on.
Getting lost is proceeding into the unknown. To reject
the familiar, so rooted in our nervous system and minds,
requires discipline. The difficulty is that we have to know
so much to understand what it is we do and why we do it,
in order to know what to avoid. We are not attempting to
simply eliminate the known systems, but also to realize
how we have adapted to those systems. It is the habits of
adaptation which will keep us reproducing the system.
The system itself is not the problem, but rather this
human capacity to imprint unconsciously a new system
upon our old system-or to embody the maps of our
acquaintance, however tenuous.
We are close to improvisation here. When lost, we will
have to relate appropriately to unknown and changing
conditions. The dictionary explains that improvisation
means 'extemporare', or 'out of the time'. I suggest that
we interpret "out of the time" in two contradictory ways.
I suggest we discard all notions of clocks, and the half-life
of cesium, or celestial mechanics, none of which are
capable of improvisation, and equate time with human
experience of duration, which is to say the experiences
accumulated in life, so that "the time" will mean who we
have become. "Out of the time" will mean that, out of
experience (conscious or not) there is material for making
something.
Simultaneously, "out of" should be construed as 'aside
from'. We have to use what we have become in such a way
as to not be so controlled by it that it is automatically
reproduced.
Improvisation is a word for something which can't
keep a name; if it does stick around long enough to acquire
a name, it has begun to move toward fixity. Improvisation
tends in that direction.
Dance is the art of taking place. Improvisational dance
finds the places. °"'
-to be continually continued.
CQICI Sourcebook 129
photo© 1980 Stephen Petegorsky
by Christina Svane
First thina you notice is her eyes. She can spin
out her gaze like fine from a fly-fisher's reel. our focus
the hook at its end. She can stretch her vision like a limb.
let it swing. lean and pivot on it. take hold of something.
She can look in our direction and stop her focus midway.
as if a uee were between us. And the next moment send
her eyes flving across the space. with her body in tow.
Even when she's hardh· mm·ing. there's so much
going on that the onh· way t.o keep ~p with her is to let
her remind you that seeing is nor a relationship with an
external world. but with \'Ourself. There is no external
world. What you see flyi~g across the room is thought.
And when she moves. vou see the thought that moves this
woman through the thought of space. It almost makes
you squirm to feel your focus held so intimately within
hers.
How does she do it? With a tiny impulse she pro-
jects an enormous sweeping gesture that ne\·er happens.
Because you thought it was going to happen. you see it;
then \'OU see that she hasn't moved. With the skill of a
Chapiin. she will prime ;·ou for pathos. and just as you
begin pouring ir out. you notice she is cavorting in a
rather awkward. obscene and brilliant dance. You want
to laugh. but you're still carrying your last emotion. Your
expectations are weighing you down. Unloading, you dive
back in and find a major clue in the timing between the
shifts in her focus and the movements of her bodv. You
see her perception as thought, and a split second later see
its impact through her body in movement, ideas being
completed as feelings. (In her "blind" work, in which she
has been exploring learning movement with eyes closed.
we see her "seeing" through her ears, skin, nose and per-
haps other senses. Here she makes it crvstal clear that
every movement is determined h)· her p'erceptions, or
designed to clarify th em.)
At this point we are pulled inro the sparking space
of awareness of .one's own awareness. in which. as Lisa
says, "It's all you, right?" In fact, one of Lisa'~ trade-
marks is the nerve-synapse suddenness of her sequences.
Although her movement invention is prolific, (and inimita-
ble, though aspects of her style have cropped up in many
new dancers'!. it is not the movements that we are asked to
focus on. Ir.is in the moment before and after each im-
pulse where we are intent on discovering how the synapse
works and what the code is.
Rarely will she follow momentum through to its
natural resolution or decav. but allows each change in her
perception caused by the movement to alter its course. As
130 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Vohm1£ 12 1987
she drops her head toward t~e floor, she may suddenly
reverse direction in response to the startling loss of her
horizon, the wood grain flooding her screen. Like the
tribesmen of the rainforest who, never having seen a large
clearing, read distant animals as close range miniatures, she
registers the surprises of an unconditioned perception.
This makes her appear as a mind that has just dropped
into a body and is finding out how it all works. For this
she needs feedback through the consequences of her every
move, and perhaps this is what also gives us the feeling
that she is never dancing alone. She is dancii;ig a duet with
the entire con ten ts of her consciousness.
Within minutes we feel the spirit of her work, but it
is as challenging to actually read her dancing as it is James
Joyce's Ulysses. Both artists take consciousness as their
content, and in order to anastomose across the many levels
of its structure, they must work with a multi-faceted
mind. Joyce was often originally misunderstood as writing
stream of consciousness while in a subconscious state; and
Lisa can be similarly misinterpreted by one who thinks she
is simply doing the next thing that comes along. But
closer examination reveals distinct, unbroken threads of
sensory perception, reactions, personal and cultural mem-
ory, imagery ranging from archetypal and hallucinogenic
to geographical and anatomical, and the dialogue of self-
questioning and self-discovery. Lisa has the added chal-
lenge of weaving these elements into a multi-dimensional
tapestry-with rhythm, cadence and echo-on the spot.
Imagine that Ulysses was never put on paper, and that you
had one crack at understanding what Joyce was doing by
hearing it read aloud.
The way time is shaped in both artists' work has
a lot of connections to experimental musical forms.
Joyce, trained and admired as a singer, composed language
as music, and was the first writer to illustrate the natural
tendencies of human consciousness to break down lang-
uage into its phonetic and rhythmic elements, rearranging
them in the processes of intellectual and emotional diges-
tion. Lisa's unique orchestration of consciousness also
draws on her musical background. Something of a prodigy
on the classical guitar, she was asked to teach it when quite
young, and for a while considered, like Joyce, a musical
career. Identifying with the inspiration at the source of
pre-industrial tribal music, she was the first dancer I ever
saw who used such songs not as an exotically primitive
element but with the projection that she was of the people
who sang them. In 197 5. while teaching video to dancers
at Bennington College, she taped the entire ethnomusical
library and has studied and used it ever since, constantly
adding to it. See11: as a rebel in Daniel Nagrin 's perform-
ance group for bringing her voice into improvisations, she
has continued to develop her own technique of vocal im-
provisation. In performance, she uses her voice at times
to find an evocative image which carries through in move-
ment; conjuring yearning, haunting, and funny characters;
dismantling language into burping hoots and reedy chords,
or following one phrase into a timeless primal clearing. It
may be her experiences in this territory that endow her
non-vocal dancing with an almost tragic muteness, holding
an epic that cannot be told.
Volume 1 2 1987
And cannot be danced. We are moved by a woman
willing to dance the undanceable; to stand in the form
pointing "There" beyond it. In this we see our own willing
struggle with the limits of the senses, when what we really
want lies beyond them. To Walter de la Mare who said,
"Language is the banging on a cracked kettle for bears to
dance to, when all the while we long to 1nove the stars to
tears," I would show Lisa dancing. It is "precise! y the inade-
quacy of the medium to be what it inditates, that moves us
when she dances. She leaves us with what we thought we
saw, and the reality of that, despi_t~ithe failure of the
senses to prove what we have feltf' ·- ·
Perhaps this is the answer to a qliestion I have had
for ten years. Why did Lisa stop her experimental work
in environmental performan4 in 197 5 after the success
of The Green Dream. ip which she and Cathy Weis
orchestrated a vast surreal epic performed simultaneously
throughout a transformed Victorian mansion? Did the
centerpiece of that epic-a large mirror jig-saw puzzle
painted with Michelangelo's God touching Adam. which
the viewer-participants helped put back together-foretell
a restructuring of her own ideas about the creative act?
Did questions arise which led her away from performing,
into video as a medium of examining perception, then as a
performance tool, and back into performing in a new way?
Did she decide that making environments, or using sets
no matter how evocative, only reinforced the illusion of
an outside world? That it was more to the point to per-
form seeing than to make things to be seen? Did she, like
Joyce, reject the premise of an epic requiring "external"
adventures and redefine it as the adventures of a mind dis-
covering its own language? Whatever the answers are. Lisa
Nelson is an epic dancer who has become. for many of us.
the paradigm of improvisation; the moreso against the
backdrop of a dance scene that is increasing! y geared to
spectacle.
I would love to see the return of the mustachioed
figure in the Hawaiian shirt from PA RT (with Steve
Paxton, to Robert Ashley's Private Parts) who, like one
of Chaplin's characters, seems to have become a classic
now permanently living in the hearts of hundreds of us
who watched (and not always with dry eyes) her/his?
development. Who but Lisa could throw open her arms as
if to keep the stars from falling, shift her gaze to become
a conductor about to start up the orchestra, and move her
fingers to become a villager reading a newspaper, all in one
breath? Who else could give you the feeling of falling
down in rush hour in Grand Central Station, then drop
you in the wilderness howling at the moon? Now that she
has built her own studio on a mountainside in the North-
East Kingdom of Vermont, who knows what she'll come
out with. She has always been a rebel against the predict-
able, lighting up things that lie in shadow, the only true
meaning of the avant-garde.
Why do I want to see her on an opera house stage
making the million dollar sets disappear, evaporating the
mountains, holding the reins of the elements? Why do I
want for her what she doesn't want for herself? I think
we only get one every now and then, and sometimes not
anyone, and she is one. -Ct
CQ/CI Sourcebook 131.
by Carol Horwitz
THE POLITICS OF
IMPROVISATION
Of all the dance forms,
improvisation is probably the most
political-because it contains the
urgency of immediacy. Improvisation
forces people to make decisions on
their feet and to live with those deci-
sions. It helps people to see how their
decisions affect others. When done
by groups of people, it has everything
to do with learning to work with
others-not competing but working
with the idea of the total picture and
the individual's small but significant
place in that overall picture. When
working in duet form, as in contact
improvisation, one is forced to really
listen to what the other body is say-
ing. In contact, movement choices
are based upon forces of nature such
as gravity and the spiral plus a direct
response to the movement of the
partner's body. This ability means
survival in the contact form. While
improvising, we learn again and again
that to listen to another's movement
is to come to a shared meeting ground.
This is the politics of improvisation.
With this in mind, I conducted an
informal survey in the fall of 1984 to
see how improvisation was being used
in colleges and universities through-
out the United States. Because of
financial constraints, I wrote only to
dance programs which offered at least
a masters degree in dance. There were
60 in all; 31 responded. Here follows
the information gathered:
25 of the 31 schools who respond-
ed had improvisation courses. 5
schools offered it only as part of
another course such as composition.
15 schools offered one level, 7 offered
it at 2 levels, and 3 schools offered
three levels. 10 schools awarded 1
credit, 9 schools awarded 2 credits,
4 awarded 3 credits and 2 awarded
4 credits. 27 of the 31 schools be-
lieved it should be a required course,
16 believed one semester was enough,
4 felt that 2 semesters sufficed, 2
thought 3 should be required and one
believed 4 semesters should be re-
quired. 15 schools allowed it to be
132 CQ/Cl Sourcebook
Volume 12 1987
repeated for credit.
Accompaniment for class ranged
from voice to sounds, to canned
music, piano and percussion, the
range generally found in technique
classes. The music was primarily
provided by the instructor with occa-
sional visits by musicians. One college
always had live accompaniment, but
this was the exception.
It was felt that a wide variety of
movement experiences should be of-
fered in improvisation classes. These
should include experiences with an
aural, visual and art emphasis. Stu-
dents should be exposed to the ele-
ments of dance in their most funda-
mental forms: space, rhythm/time,
dynamics, body articulation, effort
qualities, line, emotional qualities,
gesture, sound, texture, sensory aware-
ness on all levels. Other important
aspects to include were phrase devel-
opment, chance [methods], environ-
mental inspiration, examination of
personal idioms, group dynamics,
elements of contact work, awareness
of inner/outer space. Through these
experiences, students should show an
improvement in performance skills,
a greater ability to think on their feet,
greater trust in themselves and in each
other, have an improved ability to re-
call, and generally be able to view the
total picture within the framework of
the dance, and dance within the frame-
work of the arts.
Most of the schools had members
of their full-time faculty teach the
improvisation classes. The appropri-
ate teacher just seemed to surface.
Some of the notable improvisation
teachers mentioned were Daniel Nag-
rin, Claudia Melrose, Kathryn Karipi-
des, Irini Nadel [Rockwell] , Barbara
Dilley, Shirley Ririe, Joan Woodbury,
Loa Mangelson and Ann Riordan,
among others. On only one occasion
did a Teaching Assistant teach improv-
isation.
Qualifications for the "ideal" im-
provisation teacher would also qualify
a person for sainthood, things to
which all dance teachers aspire. He or
she should be experienced, sensitive,
have an ability to work from a prob-
lem-solving base, be able to create an
Volume 1 2 1987
environment safe for exploration, be
constructive, kind, open, have a sense
of humor, empathy, extensive experi-
ence in improvisation performance,
be able to handle emotional blocks,
have an ability to work with imagery,
be able to create a group dynamic, be
able to structure problems that lead
to meaningful solutions and, probably
most importantly, be able to change
plans mid-stream.
The effects of improvisation ex-
perience upon students were noticed
in their ability to experiment, explore
and develop bits of material. They
had a wider movement vocabulary,
improved creativity, were more in
touch with their own movement
sources, took greater risks, created
more authentic, less stylistic work,
had improved technique and became
more sophisticated self-aware students.
They were more comfortable dancing
with others. Students often experi-
enced an evolution from fear to de-
light and it was a turning point in
many of their lives.
It was felt that improvisation had
value in and of itself. Besides the ob-
vious benefit of helping students
learn to choreograph, it is an aid in
learning to see and understand dance
movement as it relates to all the arts.
It allows the uniqueness of the indi-
vidual to be celebrated. It teaches
students to consider the value of their
own movements before setting judg-
ments. Improvisation enhances crea-
tive thinking and problem-solving,
heightens kinesthetic perception,
creates an awareness of group dynam-
ics, fosters a personal viewpoint about
dance, deepens awareness of move-
ment logic and helps students to live
creatively.
No one mentioned the importance
of improvisation in preparing students
to teach children or members of the
"very special" population. Also, the
use of improvisation in dance therapy
was not mentioned. I was surprised
by this omission as I feel that improv-
isation is the very basis for working
with these groups, which many danc-
ers will do at some point in their
career.
Improvisation is seen as an art form
separate from more "conventional"
dance. At one school, students have
to perform a structured improvisation
before they can receive their dance
degree. It was felt that there are some
who are brilliant at improvising and
they should perform. There were
mixed feelings about the way it should
be presented. Many saw it as having
an important place within convention-
al choreography or within structured
choreographic works. Some felt that
it shouldn't be mixed with traditional
choreography. Some felt that it stood
more strongly in an intimate setting.
The University of Utah was one
place that received recognition as a
place to learn about improvisation.
Naropa Institute was another. Some
of the other schools mentioned were
Ohio State University, UCLA, Arizona
State University, University of Texas
at Austin, Wesleyan University, Univ-
ersity of Arizona at Tempe, Sarah
Lawrence, NYU School of the Arts,
and Southern Methodist University.
I think it is obvious from this
survey that improvisation plays an
important role in the training of
dancers. I know there is a place in
dance for the highly competitive class-
es that train the super-tech dancers
who are so popular today, but I feel
this survey supports the belief that
there is still more to being a dancer,
and that it can be uncovered through ·
self-exploration. An improvisation
class can become the laboratory for
exploration of the form and of the
self. It can be a forum for sharing, not
competing. It can be a place to cele-
brate our differences while helping us
to understand that we share the same
roots. "Self-exploration," "nurtur-
ing," "sharing," "celebrating," "life-
enhancing"-to me, these words rep-
resent a very strong, positive politics.
It's this approach that keeps dance
vital and strong.~
CQICI Sourcebook 133
SMALL DANCE POEM
... with thanks to Chogyam Trungpa
you start out
to find your little dance
first move, best move
you don't even know you are beginning
you think perhaps
you are a vegetable
of course, that is true
you begin and begin
you don't even know you are beginning
you stand up
you start this way many times
to find this little dance
you've heard so much about
and this time
you are standing on a patient turtle
you start out
to find your little dance
this time you think
you are the great ballplayer Sadahara Oh
but you work hard to keep
both feet on the ground
you forget about slashing your mummy
and race home for dinner
without going anywhere
you find more in your little dance
than there was the time before
and think about it less
you are a little dance
but you are not alone
you are hanging in the closet
in between a black sealskin cape
with Betty Davis shoulders
and a green striped bowling shirt
that once belonged to someone named Marty
you are not harassed by gravity this time
and the next time you will not even care
history proclaims to each
a little dance
bare! y a step is taken
but the changes compound
you start out
a little dance
you are called "de born born"
fidgety rhythmic pulse
you can travel anywhere you choose
there is not a country you can not em brace
and you never leave your little spot
you start out to find your little dance
first move, best move
best way, only way
only way, one way
and music
or no music
or no music
with music
no way, wrong way
first move, best move
- Terrie Yaffe
[Text performed with Karen Nelson and Nancy Stark Smith
at Breitenbush jam performance, 1986, Eugene, Oregon.}
134 CQ/CI Saurcebook
Volume 12 1987
Editor Note
In Banyoles, Spain, two hours north of Barcelona,
there is a 16th-century stone farmhouse with a horsebarn
made into a spacious dance studio. Three large windows
open directly onto manure-rich hay fields. It's harvest time
and the old Spanish farmers throw the bales one by one
onto simple wooden carts pulled by old-model tractors.
The first night of our workshop we meet only briefly in
the studio. In the evening's waning light, we 'arrive'-from
Denmark, Germany, America, Switzerland-we stretch and
breathe, arriving f;om the road, arriving into our bodies,
into the room, smelling the fields, hearing the pigs squeal
and sing altogether in their pens, feeding, down the road.
Without much plan, we dance in the deepening blue light
that obscures faces but leaves a rich glow that's inviting to
dance in. We stand back from the windows, putting what's
left of the light in front of us, and dance and watch each
other in silence. I like this beginning very much. It's un-
adorned and mysterious. Spacious and intimate. We're
ready already. It's nice here.
Two weeks later. A lot has happened. As usual with an
intensive workshop, it's been intense. We seem to have
risked a lot, been satisfied and confused, tired and exuber-
ant, alone and together here by the ripe fig tree in northern
Spain, and now it's time to go. Some don't want to leave,
others are ready, curious to see what new directions these
weeks will produce in their work. Soon the goodbye com-
mittee, waving the others off, whittles down to a solitary
few. Bill and I decide to stay at Arlequi for an extra day,
to not rush leaving, and-very unusual for me-to stay not
only to the end, but after the end.
I found Bill in the studio after everyone was gone, sitting
in the windowframe watching the farmer turning over his
field in the evening light. A brush fire was burning up on
the hill, and it all seemed very still. The light was just as it
had been the first night we came-blueblack, highlighting
surfaces. The room looks small, and so empty, I thought.
How incredible that so much can happen in a place and it
stays empty when you go. That you can fill it so full and
leave and it's still empty.
What I mean is, Yolanda cried out when we changed from
fire to earth state and Ole held onto her until her writhing
passed. She was Spanish, he was Danish, and ... days later
Ole crashed heads with his friend J orgen, both rushing out
of the studio dazed and confused and coming back in later
laughing. And Marie, living through the special dance she
tells of in this issue's "Still Moving" column. I guess it's
really so obvious, especially to dancers, that so much can
grow out of thin air-that just a bunch of people moving
and thinking and talking and seeing can generate such ap-
parent substance and then be gone without a trace.
The ending continued. As soon as we waved the last
person off at the bus, the weather changed dramatically. It
rained all the next day as it hadn't the whole two weeks we
were there. New tenants arrived, invisibly dividing the
house into theirs and ours. It was as if some Red Sea that
had parted now closed over, making the clearing we had
lived in for two weeks not just changed but completely
gone. The figs were still there, ripe and heavy in their
teardrop sacs hanging from the tree. You could run your
fingernail down the side of the soft thick brown mottled
skin, open the fig and find deep red fruit moist and
delicious, so satisfying, so perfect after dancing.
Nancy Stark Smith
Volume 13 1988
Volume 13
1988
Michaela by Bill Arnold
CQ/CI Sourcebook 135
STILL
MOVING
As we reviewed the material sent in
for this issue's Newsletter and "Still
Moving," we noticed that quite a few
of the pieces-including the following
ones by Daniel Lepkoff and Keith
Ormand-raise the issue of hierarchy
within the Contact work and communi-
ty. We thought it would be interesting
to offer an historical perspective on the
subject, so we asked Cynthia Novack
for permission to reprint a relevant sec-
tion from her doctoral dissertation (an
ethnography of Contact Improvisation).
As usual, we await your response. [Eds.]
136 CQ/CI Sourcebook
'" 3
Letter to CQ from Daniel Lepkof f
QUESTIONS NOT TO ASK:
Why is the aerial lift a signature of an accomplished Con-
tact dancer?
W!ly are complete beginners so beautiful to watch, and
experienced Contact lmprovisors often so boring?
Why is there a hierarchy of Contact skills?
Why were many of my advanced Contact students un-
consciously resistant to learning?
Why can someone become advanced in a form based on
communication?
Why do I expect to get "danced on" at Contact jams?
Why are Contact-based performances so devoid of vision
and self-examination?
Why does the allure of gymnastic skills overshadow the
exploration of making contact?
Why do experienced Contact dancers get frustrated with
beginners?
Why does a form rooted in the senses give rise to a
generic look, when life itself is so varied?
Why did I overhear an audience member say during a
C.I. performance, "How can adults do all of that and
not seem to feel anything?" 1r
DANIEL LEPKOFF has been instrumental in the development of
the teaching and performance practice of Contact Improvisation
since its inception in 1972. He is currently based in New York
City.
Volume 13 1988
ANSWERS NOT TO BE QUESTIONED
Response to Danny Lepkoff's HQuestions Not To Ask "
in "Still Moving," CQ Vol. 13:3, Fall 88
by Karen Nelson
"Why is the aerial lift a signature of an accomplished Con-
tact dancer?" [Lepkoff]
A. It does take some physical skill and listening ability to com-
municate timing, impulse and subtlety of moving weight and
support in order to accomplish the aerial lift. I'd say it's more
like the ink than the signature. [Nelson]
"Why are complete beginners so beautiful to watch, and ex-
perienced Contact Improvisors often so boring?"·
Beginners' Luck-we are watching an exploration of totally
new territory, the unknown. With experienced contact im-
provisors we see expanding knowledge of an infinite unknown.
Yet often a stage of doing contact involves a kind of automatic
response, everything seems predictable for the viewer and doer,
even if it still feels great to do, it can be personally stagnating.
Learning new senses of disorientation and new choices of im-
provisation is challenging to the imagination.
"Why is there a hierarchy of Contact skills?"
Safety; some semblance of order is useful. To engage the
senses, gross and subtle, is an overwhelming field of discovery.
A teacher's personal "hierarchy" of skills is probably
something very alose to their own dancing of contact.
P.S. What are yours?
"Why are so many of my advanced Contact students un-
consciously resistant to learning?
"Why can someone become advanced in a form based on com-
munication?"
How do you as a teacher read a person's unconscious? Is this
an advanced form of communication?
"Why do I expect to get 'danced on 1 at Contact jams?"
Personal history.
"Why are Contact-based performances so devoid of vision
and self-examination?"
Because it is an unprecedented performance form and a study
of performance values doesn't come along with basic learn-
ing of and therefore showing of the work. It's a style of its
own, still evolving.
"Why does the allure of gymnastics skills overshadow the ex-
ploration of making contact?"
Could be because everyone loves and marvels at the ability
of gymnasts-like when you watch the Olympics-and it's ex-
citing to see these tricks performed live. Maybe it stimulates
childhood memories.
"Why do experienced Contact dancers get frustrated with
beginners?"
Because beginners are better at not knowing what could come
next.
"Why does a form rooted in the senses give rise to a generic
look, when life itself is so varied?"
Why do human beings look alike, distinguishable from
kangaroos?
"Why did I overhear an audience member say during a C.I.
performance, 'How can adults do all of that and not seem
to feel anything?'"
How can we make this incredibly rich and varied inner world
of sensation visible to outside eyes? *
KAREN NELSON is co-director of Joint Forces Dance Company
which produces the annual CI JAM at Breitenbush in Oregon where
she lives. She has been practicing CJ since 1977, teaching and perfor-
ming in North America and Europe.
Volume 14 1989
CQICI Sourcebook 137
STILL MOVING (cont'd)
THE BERLIN JAM
by Keith Ormand
Living in Berlin for the last seven
months I have had ample time to
ponder. As a foreigner I am often fac-
ed with a certain level of culture gap,
and when this carried over into Contact
Improv I found some issues which I
would like to share and invite comment
on. Can Contact Improv cross these
gaps? Does Contact lmprov fit into the
German society? And, more pertinent
for me, into the Berlin Society?
Contact Improv is not absent in
Berlin, nor has it been for the last eight
years. Every week at least five different
classes are taught drawing more than 40
students. Workshops are sponsored
throughout the year with fair success,
and there are even a few performances,
performance groups here which have
utilized Contact Improv. Clearly Con-
tact Improv has precedent here. And yet
no jam has been established. Why not?
138 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Previously I lived in Seattle where a
jam has developed, especially over the
last three years, from a small group in-
to a large society, unhierarchical, and
very supportive. The jam there draws
from a community of about 100 people,
and hosting between 15 and 30 people
each Saturday. In the last year the Jam
sponsored six or seven informal perfor-
mances, and as a group we consumed
a lot of beer and time. The jam is a place
to see people that I might not during the
week, and a place where I can get
together with others and make ar-
rangements for the following week. It
has been a place for learning contact in
a way which the classroom cannot pro-
vide, and for helping other people to
understand something which they can
not figure out by themselves. It is a
place where I can see some of the best
dance in Seattle, and get to dance with
some of the best dancers. And all of this
exists with a m1mmum of
government/bureaucracy.
So why has there been no initial in-
terest in a jam in Berlin? Is it that in
Berlin there is no interest in this sort of
interaction? Is it that my level of interest
comes across as pathological? Or do
people here only participate in contact
classes and workshops for the physical
training? Yet the jam also provides ex-
ercise for those of us that like that sort
of thing too. Is it the challenge of dan-
cing without supervision? I have ex-
perienced the desire to be critically
observed at times. Could it be that all
of Berlin feels this way all of the time?
No. Actually for the last six months
there has been a jam in Berlin, and it
has had a significant participation.
Those of us who do come have
developed into a society which I find
reassuringly similar to the one I left in
Seattle. And they have created some of
the most enjoyable dance I have ever ex-
perienced. And with one exception not
one of them felt experienced enough in
the past to participate in a higher level
course. In other words noone who has
been involved in the preexisting contact
society (note earlier exception) has par-
ticipated in the jam.
The jam has been publicized only by
word of mouth, yet quite a few people
have found it with very little contact to
the established Contact Improv society.
Further, when I have talked to those
dancers whom I know have danced
Contact Improv previously they are in-
variably aware of the jam and pertinent
information regarding it, but they won't
participate. First they want to know if
there will be music, and will someone
be leading, and how many people will
be there. There used to be music, but
now that the weather is warm I bicycle
and can not carry the tape deck. I used
to teach for 15 minutes or half an hour,
but now it cuts into our time to dance,
too much. If you come there will be one
more person than I expected. Is this ar-
rangement too risky for the experienc-
ed dancer?
The real question is "what is 'being
taught?" How is it possible that a large
group of dancers can be involved in lear-
ning something and have no interest or
incentive to use this knowledge? Can
you imagine studying German for eight
years and never trying to speak or read
it except in the classroom? Let alone
teach it without encouraging your
students to practice somewhere? Just
what was the experience of these ex-
perienced Contact Improv dancers in
Berlin? Does this kind of problem exist
elsewhere? What is in the future for
Contact Improv? Is it possible that jams
will no longer be visited by experienced
dancers? Is a Hierarchy developing? Is
it possible, that in today's society tradi-
tional values are becoming invalid, and
the sort of environment encountered in
a jam is no longer of interest? What
aspects of Contact lmprov have you
seen change in the last few years? Could
it be that Contact Improv is no longer
a vehicle for ideas, but merely a style of
movement?
Contact Improv has existed in Berlin
for nearly a decade. Now a society, in
its infancy, has developed to support it.
Communication is opening up. The jam
welcomes all new participants (See let-
ter in this issue's CQ Newsletter).
Perhaps in the future we will be able to
invite you here for an international Jam.
In the meantime, come and visit for
your next vacation. *
Volume 13 1988
THE BERLIN JAM II.
by Keith Ormand
The Berlin Jam has now been in
existence for over a year, and is
showing no signs of coming to an
end. Many of the problems en-
countered a year ago have vanished,
and the Jam is entering a new stage.
As it grows, new problems come to
the surface, and with time these also
will be replaced. At least three of the
four teachers offering contact
courses regularly here support the
Jam by informing their students of
its existence. As a result, there is a
regular attendance of 12-16 people,
and usually one or two are there for
the first time. In return, information
is exchanged in the Jam regarding
the classes and workshops which are
available. Furthermore, The Berlin
Contact Ballet has been formed by
participants of the Jam, and has
three performance dates in the up-
coming months. On the other side,
many of the people who have taken
contact courses since before the Jam
began have never been to the Jam. I
hear that they do not have time since
Saturday is the only day during the
week to take a day off from dance.
Those of us who enjoy dancing on
Saturday respect this, and appreciate
it. I have also heard that some of
the more advanced dancers would
come if more of the other advanced
dancers were there. Contact
Hierarchy?
The Berlin Jam is predominately
male, with a ratio of 2: 1. This is not
surprising in a city where 75% of the
contact teachers are male. Last
February I had the opportunity to
spend a weekend in Cologne, where
Volume 13 1988
a jam was also organized. It was a
pleasant change to encounter a jam
with 10 women and 4 men. I also
participated in a workshop in
Brussells, in which I was the only
male for the first two days, and one
of three by the last day. Last
December I participated in the Euro-
pean Contact Jam in Angers,
France, where the proportions were
about equal, something like 18:17,
and I am not sure which gender had
the majority. Now, in Angers, there
was one woman who was as
fascinated by the gender question as
myself. She asked questions such as
"How does it feel, you men, to be
dancers?" and made statements such
as "I really like seeing two men
dance together ... It is such a dif-
ferent energy than when two women,
or a man and a woman are dancing
together." Being one of the men
dancing at the time this last state-
ment was uttered, I was brought
abruptly to the realization that men
and women are different. Well, of
course I won't presume to say how
we are different. I do not often have
difficulties in telling men and women
apart, and if there is any lingering
doubt, I can always contrive to
dance with the one in question and
take a gender energy reading. But
precisely what this difference is,
eludes me.
Have you ever been told by
another dancer that he/she prefers
dancing with men? Have you ever
told another dancer that you prefer
men? Have you ever told your
parents that you prefer men? I hear
this preference often these days,
much more often than a decided
preference for dancing with women.
And generally, the assertion of a
preference for women partners in
Contact Improvisation is often ac-
companied with the assertion of a
specific woman. I do not want to
imply that this is a problem. It is not
a problem, unless you are not one of
the "preferred dancers." After all,
there are men, too, that I do not
want to dance with.
Many dance forms have been
dominated by men. In Kabuki, and
Keith Ormand & Andi Lucas in the Berlin Jam.
Peking Opera, women are tradi-
tionally excluded. Although not a
dance form, Shakespeare's company
had no women on the stage. Contact
is much more lenient. Although even
in ballet, men acquire recognition
more easily than women, actually,
ballet is not a good comparison,
since, in Contact a very good female
dancer may be regarded as outstan-
ding, while a good male dancer may
be regarded as standard. I believe it
is rather the opposite in ballet. And
of course, I do not want to use Con-
tact Improvisation as a metaphor for
society. That is up to you.
Actually, I am interested in heirar-
chy. Who is good enough to dance
with? Who should be allowed to par-
ticipate in special jams and con-
ferences? Who should be excluded?
At one point someone at the Berlin
Jam said that we should not tell
anyone else about the jam, because
there might not be enough room,
and we might not like the
newcomers. He conceded that
anybody who had the energy to fit
the jam into their schedule probably
would not be so disagreeable, and
probably could find enough room to
dance in. In Angers, the question of
who should be allowed to participate
in the jam, and in turn, in the con-
ference, was not easily solved. Well,
I know that there is nothing I hate
more than being forced to dance
CQICI Sourcebook 139
STILL MOVING (cont'd)
with bad dancers, or listen to th~
opinions of unqualified, nonfeachers.
(Of course I know that space is often
a problem here, but I prefer to deal
with the problem of exclusion which
occurs when there is enough space.)
When is a dancer good enough to
go to jams? Over here, many people
start contact in classes. But how do
they know that they are good enough
to go to a jam? How do they know
that they have reached the point that
they can participate in workshops for
experienced dancers? If they are not
part of the dance crowd, they may
never know. When they come to the
jam and find that none of the dance
crowd from the classes is there
regularly, they have no standard to
measure their own progress until
they have established themselves
either in the jam, or in the class. It
is easy to think, as a newcomer, that
the really good dancers do not come
to the jam because they do not want
to dance with the people there. It is
easy to come to the conclusion that
the dancers in the jam are not as
good as the dancers not at the jam.
This may be why it is so easy to
dance in the jam; no challenge. Is it
that the good dancers find the jam
not challenging enough? or are they
afraid of being hurt by dancing with
someone who is unexperienced? I
have heard these excuses. But how
can the beginning dancer get enough
experience to dance with a good
dancer so that he/she won't hurt
him/her? Are we going to support
the beginning dancers? or is it a
justifiable aim to keep contact
among ourselves, now that there are
so many of us. It would be safer,
perhaps, to dance only with people
we know. There may still be a little
room here for taking risks. Or
maybe you take risks by offering
classes to beginners. Are your
students good enough to go to a
jam? Contact is in no danger of dy-
ing out, but is there any possibility
for growth?
In Berlin, the space problem is left
alone, but we keep a careful eye on
the quality problem. When a bad
dancer shows up, we change the
standard. In this way, we are sure
that all the dancers participating in
the Berlin Contact Jam are good. 'fr
KEITH ORMAND established the Berlin
Jam a few months after having moved
there from Seattle where he had been ac-
tive in the Contact community for many
years.
140 CQ/CI Sourcebook
The following piece is an excerpt
from Cynthia Novack's doctoral disser-
tation, "SHARING THE DANCE, an
ethnography of contact improvisation,"
written in 1986, soon to be published.
For more information contact Cynthia
at 46 Warren Street, NYC, NY 10007.
EGALITARIANISM AND HIERARCHY
IN CONTACT IMPROVISATION
by Cynthia Novack
Anthropologist Louis Dumont
has suggested that:
"The ideal of liberty and
equality follows immediately
f ram the conception of man as an
individual. In effect, if the whole
of humanity is deemed present in
each man, then each man should
be free and all men are equal . ..
By contrast, as soon as a collec-
tive end is adopted by several
men, their liberty is limited and
their equality brought into ques-
tion."'
Dumont continues an analysis begun by
Toqueville of conflicts in American
society, arguing that "to adopt a value
is to introduce hierarchy, and a certain
consensus of values, a certain hierarchy
of ideas, things, and people, is indispen-
sable to social life" quite independent-
ly of "natural inequalities or the
distribution of power." Consequently,
the ideal of equality, "even if it is
thought superior, is artificial."'
Dumont is proposing that the concept
of equality among individuals will in-
evitably be challenged by hierarchies
arising from social roles and social ac-
tion defined by the very concept of
equality. His argument does not defend
the use of power and control in hierar-
chy, but rather attempts to separate
hierarchy from the automatic associa-
tion with power and control which it has
in Western culture. Contact improvisa-
tion embraced values of individualism,
equality, and anti-hierarchical relation-
ships, but, if Dumont is right, one
would expect contradictions to appear
between these values and the differences
developing from social roles and social
action, even if no one takes power.
In the initial formation of contact im-
provisation, an egalitarian ethos main-
tained itself, with Steve Paxton as the
teacher. As the contact improvisation
movement developed, the looseness of
organization within the movement con-
tributed to an atmosphere of fluidity.
As Steve Paxton notes, people were free
to come and go; for those who chose to
be involved in contact improvisation on
only a casual basis, not much was at
stake. So long as no one was concerned
about the outcome of a performance
other than to demonstrate the exciting
new dance form of contact improvisa-
tion, and so long as the group of peo-
ple participating in the dance form re-
mained a small group of friends,
everyone could be viewed on an equal
basis. Contact improvisation could be
practiced in both a social setting and a
performance setting by the same people.
However, for those people who
became involved with the dance form on
a professional basis, teaching and/or
performing to earn their living, a great
deal was often at stake. As the years
went by, many of those who had been
doing contact improvisation since the
beginning became teachers, and some
began to form performance groups.
There was a spate of local group
organization from 1977-79, as well as an
increase in touring by individuals gnd
by ad-hoc groups. Both teaching and
performing established distinctions of
roles within the movement. Differences
between amateurs and professionals,
between the less skilled and the very
skilled, and between the social dancers
and the performers developed. Lisa
Nelson, after talking about the "folk"
nature of early contact improvisation,
commented, ''Eventually a lot of peo-
ple became teachers and that started to
change things ... if you'd been perfor-
ming, that kind of became a habit and
you wanted to keep performing ... after
a while, it took you away from just be-
ing 'a folk' and spending time with 'the
Volume 13 1988
people."'
Inevitably, the ideqlogy of
egalitarianism and spontaneity was
challenged by the appearance of implicit
hierarchy and overt planning. The
demands of performing and operating
within the professional dance world-
promoting one's work, applying for
grants, seeking students-involved these
dancers in somewhat different concerns
from people who were participating in
contact improvisation for social and
recreational reasons.
Dancers were often differentiated
from each other on a more informal
basis. Some emerging differences were
simply based on the level of skill of in-
dividual participants: everyone began to
know who the most able dancers were.
Elizabeth Zimmer recalled her percep-
tions of the contact improvisation jams
in Vancouver:
"There was a hierarchy. Peo-
ple tried to pretend there wasn't,
but people who could really move
got to dance with the people who
could really move . .. like if I
would ask Andrew Harwood to
dance, we would dance for a
while and then he'd say he wanted
to stop and then he'd go on to
dance with somebody who could
really dance. So I'd consider it a
good day if I got a couple of
minutes with Peter [Ryan] and a
couple of minutes with Andrew.
So there were people you didn't
want to dance with because they
couldn't, other people you were
reluctant to ask because they were
so good, and depending on how
you were feeling about yourself
on any given day, you took cer-
tain kinds of risks."
Those who were very skilled or very
involved in developing the dance form
often found their interests diverging
from the increasing numbers of new and
relatively unskilled contact improvisers,
as well as from those long-time im-
provisers who were primarily interested
in socializing. For example, in 1979, two
large gatherings of contact improvisers
took place. "Current Exchange," a
month-long meeting at the Western
Front artists' cooperative in Vancouver,
was organized by Steve Paxton for
"serious students" of contact im-
provisation. Those wishing to attend
had to submit letters to Paxton describ-
ing their activities and interests because
Paxton did not want to teach or be in
a position of responsibility for the
group. The conference involved danc-
ing, discussion, writing, and video-
making, a full-time endeavor for peo-
ple with a strong involvement in the
dance form. "Country Jam," an event
held that same year on Vancouver
Island, was, according to Peter Ryan,
''exactly the opposite of Current Ex-
change." Ryan, who attended and
helped organize both events, laughing-
ly described Country Jam as "dance for
the proletariat ... it was homespun,
there was organic food and jamming
every day."
Ellen Elias, who attended Current Ex-
change, felt that it was "elitist" because
of the requirement to write a letter, even
though everyone who wrote was ac-
cepted. Among contact improvisers, she
says, "there was a way of being elitist
that was subtle ... there was definitely
a sense of in-group, out-group, but it
was supposed to not be there." Like
Zimmer, Elias noted the social conven-
tion of assumed equality which overlay
the existence of hierarchies.
What is particularly notable about the
contact improvisation community is not
that hierarchies existed but that many
participants were so conscious of them
and disturbed by them. As mentioned
earlier, many contact improvisers active-
ly promoted the idea that an experienc-
ed dancer should be able to dance with
anyone and learn something from it, as
well as vice versa. At the 1980 Dance
Guild Conference ["Dance As Art-
sport," in Minneapolis], many of the
remarks at a gathering to discuss
"Politics and Contact Improvisation"
were addressed to the problem of
"elitism" and the "exclusivist at-
titudes" of the "contact
heavies."' People felt strongly that the
egalitarian aspects of contact improvisa-
tion needed to be maintained.
As the years passed, cultivating a
spirit of trust and caring between part-
ners remained a central component of
contact improvisation classes and jams,
and extended to the social ethos of com-
munal organizations like Dance New
England. On a social basis, it was
strongly felt that the participation of
everyone in contact improvisation was
not to be sacrificed to the special
abilities of a few people. But this ethos
was very difficult to maintain as a part
of presenting the work publicly. *
'Louis Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966),
p. 11.
'Ibid., p. 20.
'Jerry Zientara, unpublished notes, 1980.
Patrick Scully & Ellen Schelly of Contactworks, Minneapolis, 1977.
Volume 13 1988
CQICI Sourcebook 141.
STILL MOVING
''FALL
AFTER
NEWTON''
"FALL AFTER NEWTON" is a videotape
that traces 11 years of development of Con-
tact Improvisation from Steve Paxton's
seminal work Magnesium in 1972 through
consecutive years of Contact performances
including Contact's 11th Anniversary Con-
cert Series at St. Mark's Church in NYC in
1983.
Steve proposed the documentary concept
for "F.A.N." after editing the videotape
"Chute" with Steve Christiansen and Lisa
Nelson in 1979 from performance tapes of
the first Contact concerts in 1972. The great
fortune of having video coverage of perfor-
mances from the very beginning suggested
the possibility of examining one dancer's
development and looking for corresponding
growth of the dance form itself.
In 1980, the editing team plus Nancy
Stark Smith, who was asked to be the focal
dancer for the tape, began pouring through
9 years of video documents of performances
(approx. 50 hours) and made a first 20
minute edit from the material. Seven years
of sporadic editing sessions, script writing
and revisions resulted in a 23 minute
videotape in color and black and white with
the following narration by Steve Paxton.
Lisa Nelson
["Fall After Newton" received partial funding from
the National Endowment for the Arts, the Judson
Church Dance Project of Bennington College in
Vermont, and Videoda, a project of Contact Col-
laborations, Inc. "F.A.N." and other Contact tapes
are available through Videoda, Box 22, E.
Charleston, VT 05833.}
142 CQ/CI Smtrcebook
TRANSCRIPT
by Steve Paxton
When an apple fell on his head, Isaac Newton was inspired to
describe his three laws of motion.
These became the foundation of our ideas about physics. Being essen-
tially objective, Newton ignored what it feels like to be the apple.
When we get our mass in motion, we rise above the constant call of
gravity toward the swinging, circling invitation of centrifugal force.
Dancers ride and play these forces.
Beyond Newton's third law, we discover that for every action several
equal and opposite reactions are possible. Therein lies an opportunity for
improvisation.
We are looking at performance of Contact Improvisation, a duet move-
ment form. This tape takes a sweeping look over 11 years of practice by
Nancy Stark Smith, from her first exposure to the form I was working on
when it was new in 1972, through moments chosen from consecutive
years of performing with me, Steve Paxton, and with others.
Nancy solos by testing her movement, playing with gravity and the
floor, which are, in this work, not taken for granted, but are considered
constant partners. She doesn't direct herself-she starts moving and then
lets it happen, finding ways to cope with momentum and gravity.
Here, in 1976, Nancy and her partner Curt Siddall move to follow the
point of touch as it moves-a basic focus for their improvisation. In the
play of moving and being moved, specific movements are unpredictable,
but they occur within a knowable field-of gravity, centrifugal force, sup-
port and dependency.
Human touch unites the forces which act upon the body, with the sen-
sations they provoke within the body. This interaction makes it possible to
keep all the parts of both their bodies harmonizing.
They were not so adventurous 4 years earlier. In this first performance
of Contact Improvisation, they were getting used to moving by touch. By
feeling their way, they brought back clues about the form and about
themselves and their perceptions.
"O
0
E'
<(
·-
al
s
0
..c
Cl.
c
0
';<
"' 0...
"' >
B
"'
~
E
"' -t
;:!
"' >-
u
c
"' z
~
Volume13 1988
The performance which attracted Nancy to this form
was a high energy study called Magnesium. I made
Magnesium tor a group of men at Oberlin College in_
1972. It investigated the reflexive quality of touch, with
momentum, falling, rolling and colliding. .
Magnesium ends with five minutes of standing, to
draw a great distinction in the scale of movement.
Standing still is not actually "still." Balancing on two
legs demonstrates to the dancer's body that on~ moves
with gravity, always. Observing the constant ad1ustments
the body makes to keep from falling calms the whole be-
ing. It is a meditation. It is watching the reflexes at .
work, knowing they are subtle and dependable-not 1ust
emergency measures.
Standing became one of our disciplines, keeping the
mind attentive to the body's present moment. This sim-
ple practice was preparation tor the complex intera_ctions
that would arise with a partner. As were the throwing
and catching practices that called for instant response,
introducing ourselves to adrenalized states.
At first, there seemed to be only two options-trying
to follow the flow of communication or resisting it.
Each dance is a series of on-the-spot decisions. And
they are on the spot. The soft skin is alert to the points
of contact, signals telling the dancers where they are,
orienting them to their partner and the floor. .
Their perceptions are stretching. They are adrenal1zed.
Inside their minds, the many touch events and constant-
ly changing relationships blend i:ito a continuity _of mov-
ing masses which creates a logic reached only in the
heat of the dance. A logic as secure as that found when
standing alone and watching the reflexive dance of
one's bones.
Higher momentum brings new areas of risk. In order
to develop this aspect of the form we had to be ~ble to
survive it. The support needed from the unconscious
reflexive parts of the brain is more present when the.
conscious mind is not afraid. The calmness of standing
is extended into the fall.
There are hazards. One of them is thinking ahead.
What the body can do to survive is much faster than
thought. .
It is useful to re-train the reflexes to extend the limbs,
rather than contract them during a fall. During this very
disorienting fall, Nancy's arms manage to cradle her
back, and this spreads the impact onto a grea_ter area.
And she doesn't stop moving. That helps to disperse the
impact over a slightly longer time. She doesn't seem
bothered.
Taking a brief scan through time, we begin with. the
first duet in which I danced fast with Nancy, dancing
with abandon and thrust to get into momentum. It seems
rough and disorienting for her, but she was up for it.
One year later, the sensation of movement was more
continuous, the flow of movement longer. There was
more time to feel what was happening.
While in contact, we attend to our own reflexes, which
have been stimulated by the other's movements. Our
reflexes move us, and this causes our partner to move.
This cycle of movement responses is continuous and
forms the basis of the dialogue.
Volume 13 1988
When physical safety could be assumed at a more in-
stinctive level, we were free to play with time and the
subtleties of touch. Phrases of movement could be ex-
tended indefinitely when we no longer needed to stop
and check our situation.
By 1978 we had examined the timing _of the body on
its own for six years, and began searching for ways to
change our habitual patterns. Using music was one of
these ways. For this performance, Collin Walcott pl~yed,
incorporating the random sounds of our movement into
his drumming. We danced to his rhythm, and he played
to ours.
During periods of extended soloing, we each expect
physical contact at any moment. We wait for the mo-
ment of decision to be taken by our partner or by
ourselves.
Over the years, the principles underlying our move-
ment remain the same. As the senses expand into
spherical space and the muscular system learns t~ res-
pond to touch on any surface of the body, any point can
be the fulcrum tor leverage and continuity.
Nancy and I have danced with many other partners o'.
varying backgrounds and skills. Each partner posed the1r
own kinetic puzzles which were danced through, con-
tributing new elements to the body of work, the network
of Contact Improvisation.
The main focus of training is retuning the senses. It
isn't just the sense of touch which must be expanded,
but all the senses must become elastic enough to
navigate through spherical space, to handle any posi-
tion, any change of acceleration.
It seems that what has emerged is two bodies acting
as one within the domain of the physical forces. Newton
proposed ideas about the forces and their intera?tion. In
addition, Contact deals with ideas or images which are
sensations first, then felt by the mind.
Every person who has danced Contact Improvisation
taught their variation to their partners. This network
spreads information among us.
As a member of the first generation to study Contact
Improvisation, Nancy not only learned it but helped to
define it by the direction her training took her. When she
began, no one knew what sort of body would result from
the practice, nor what properties would be developed.
We have seen the first Contact event Nancy saw,
Magnesium. This piece must have left an impression
upon her, which in turn must have been altered by the
development of the duet form.
We have been able to see Nancy's physical change in
the early years of her study, and the development of her
performance style. In looking at performance footage
mainly, we have seen little of the daily work, but have
seen the public forums in which Contact Improvisation
became widely defined. In looking at Nancy's develop-
ment over 11 years, we've seen one strand of the
physically rigorous and interwoven structure of Contact
Improvisation.
An important aspect of Contact Improvisation is the
pleasure of moving, and the pleasure of dancing with
somebody in a very spontaneous way. It happens in a
framework which considers the body in all its variety as
the primary focus from which the mind can draw. With
this, the dance is refinable to ever more precise relation-
ships with the physical forces. *
CQ/CI Sourcebook 143
STILL MOVING
THE ECSTATIC POETRY
-Searching for The
Today, like every other day, we wake up empty
and frightened. Don't open the door to the study
and begin reading. Take down the dulcimer.
Let the beauty we love be what we do.
There are hundreds of ways to kneel and kiss the ground.
Jalaluddin Rumi
We have a huge barrel of wine, but no cups.
That's fine with us. Every morning
we glow and in the evening we glow again.
They say there's no future for us. They're right.
Which is fine with us.
When I am with you, we stay up all night.
When you're not here, I can't go to sleep.
Praise God for these two insomnias!
And the difference between them.
Sometimes I forget completely
what companionship is.
Unconscious and insane, I spill sad
energy everywhere. My story
gets told in various ways: A romance,
a dirty joke, a war, a vacancy.
Divide up my forgetfulness to any number,
it will go around.
These dark suggestions that I follow,
are they part of some plan?
Friends, be careful. Don't come near me
out of curiosity, or sympathy.
I would love to kiss you.
The price of kissing is your life.
Now my loving is running toward my life shouting,
What a bargain, let's buy it.
by Martin Keogh
Imagining the whirling dervishes,
brings alive blossoming robes, hats
resembling beehives, beards like bees in
pursuit, and arms floating weightlessly,
the lone clouds in a clear summer sky.
The twirling faces focus on nothing as
they turn, peering into the betwixt and
between, into the limenal world.
The original whirling dervish was
Jalaluddin Rumi. Born on September
30, 1207 in Balkh in what is now
Afghanistan, Rumi's family settled in
Konya, Turkey after being exiled by the
Mongol invasions. During the thirteenth
century this was a meeting place at the
western end of the silk road for Chris-
tian, Islamic, Hindu, and Buddhist
worlds. Here he succeeded his father as
head of a medrese, the dervish learning
community. This fairly conventional
career ended when he met the wander-
ing dervish, Shams of Tabriz. Shams
took Rumi's books, the sum of his in-
tellectual brilliance and tossed them
down a well to show him that he need-
ed to live what he had been reading and
writing. With Shams, Rumi met the "in-
ner friend," "the beloved." However the
mystery is named, he found it with
Shams and out of their parting came
Rumi's poetry.
The poetry is described in the in-
troduction of Open Secret by John
Moyne and Coleman Barks:
"The essential power of Rumi's
poetry is ecstasy, an ecstasy
melting the confinement of the
ego into a larger, elastic, cross
pollinating dance of Selves. His is
not the ecstasy of Union, not in
the poetry. It is a love-ecstasy
mixed with some brokenness and
much longing.
"Rumi's odes and quatrains are
the personal, human records of a
man's being given a sharp, clear
consciousness of the divine, and
enduring it."
Rumi died in 1273 and his funeral
was attended by members of all religious
groups including the different Islamic
sects.
Rumi was a Sufi, poet, dancer, and
144 CQ/CI Source"book
Volume 13 1988
or JALALUDDIN RUMI
Roots Of Contact
We don't need wine to get drunk,
or instruments and singing to feel ecstatic.
No poets, no leaders, no songs,
yet we jump around totally wild.
though it is immodest to claim, his acui-
ty puts him in the geneology of Contact
Improvisation. Though some of Rumi's
poems were written, most were im-
provised and came out spontaneously
metered and rhymed.
It's difficult to find a comprehensive
description of Contact Improvisation.
There are adequate explanations of the
physical and functional aspects of our
dance, yet there is always that element
which can't be embraced with language.
Seven hundred years ago Rumi recited
poetry that to this day speaks to the soul
of Contact.
Here is a sampling of Rumi's poetry.
In the second group are poems that I feel
have a connection to C.I. In the Sufi
tradition, another name for the medrese
is the night school, following the idea
that we have a day mind and a night
mind. The day mind does the laundry
and pays the bills. The night mind is for
poetry. These poems are ideally read
aloud, at night.
Think that you're gliding out from the face of a cliff
like an eagle. Think you're walking
like a tiger walks by himself in the forest.
You're most handsome when you're after food.
Spend less time with nightingales and peacocks.
One is just a voice, the other just a color.
The clear bead at the center changes everything.
There are no edges to my loving now.
I've heard it said there's a window that opens
from one mind to another,
but if there's no wall, there's no need
for fitting the window, or the latch.
D
Contact Improvisation has always
been sheltered under the aegis, the pro-
tection, of the founders' predilection for
not creating certifications, degrees, pro-
fessional associations and strict defini-
tions of the form. From a broad variety
of sources, imagery is created, related
disciplines explored, points of view ex-
pressed, but absolutes are ultimately
dismissed. How easy it would be to con-
cretize into a set of exercises and rules
this protean dance form which at its best
is fluid.
It is accepted but only whispered how
Contact is a metaphor for our lives and
that it has therapeutic value. Less talk-
ed about, and rightly so, are the spiritual
elements, what we contact, or more
likely what contacts us during those
dances that are out of our constraint,
where a third body is created. Contact
Improvisation, like Rumi's poetry, is
limenal, neither in balance nor over the
edge. His poems express the dances that
are not predetermined, those rare
moments when the dancers disappear
and there is only the dance. *
Let the lover be disgraceful, crazy,
absentminded. Someone sober
will worry about events going badly.
Let the lover be.
Out beyond ideas of wrongdoing and rightdoing,
there is a field. I'll meet you there.
When the soul lies down in that grass,
the world is too full to talk about.
Ideas, language, even the phrase each other
doesn't make any sense.
[Special thanks to Coleman Barks for permission to use these translations. This is a partial
bibliography of Rumi's poetry: Open Secret and Unseen Rain, John Mayne and Coleman Barks,
Threshold Books; We Are Three, Coleman Barks, Maypop Books; Night and Sleep, Robert
Bly and Coleman Barks, Yellow Moon Press. M.K.]
Volume 13 1988
CQ!CI Sourcebook 145
STILL MOVING
DANCE WITH DIFFERENT NEEDS
a report by
Alito Alessi, Alan Ptashek and Karen Nelson
THE WORKSHOP
DANCE WITH DIFFERENT
NEEDS was a two day, JO hour
workshop which brought together
disabled and non-disabled people to
learn and practice contact improvisa-
tion. The focus of the workshop was to
explore contact as an accessible form for
people of all physical abilities to meet
on equal ground and experience the
movement possibilities that exist bet-
ween them. The workshop, which was
attended by 60 people, was facilitated
by Alita Alessi & Karen Nelson (Joint
Forces), with special invited guests
Kevin Finnan and Louise Richards of
England, and Alan Ptashek and Bruce
Curtis of the San Francisco Bay Area.
Earlier in the year, Karen and Alita
worked with Mobility International
U.S.A. to develop an intercultural
dance workshop with disabled and non-
disabled people from Germany and
Michael Goldhammer (left) said, "It has to be fun
to interest me."
Oregon. Alan, an able-bodied mover,
and Bruce, a quadriplegic mover, are
both from Berkeley and have been prac-
ticing contact improvisation together for
the past two years. Kevin and Louise,
from England, have been working with
different populations including dancers,
students, old, young, able-bodied and
physically alter-a bled, and have found
contact improvisation to be an accessi-
ble and engaging form to teach. The
workshops (which were free) were
wheelchair accessible, and sign inter-
preted. [Alito]
As no two people are identical in
their expression of Contact Improvisa-
tion, styles and approaches toward
teaching Contact are equally diverse.
Collaborative teaching is a challenging
situation where the exchange of facilita-
tion, structure and spontaneity is form-
ed by the communication between the
teachers. The six facilitators of the
"Dance With Different Needs"
workshop had all been previously work-
ing in their separate home areas with
people of varying physical disabilities.
With the exception of Bruce Curtis's
relatively new practice of Contact Im-
provisation, we collectively had many
years of experience in teaching Contact
to a wide range of students. As this
workshop was our first teaching col-
laboration with one another, we had
questions, but more so, an excited
curiosity about each other's ideas and
approaches toward shaping the teaching
material.
Day One
We began the first of the two day
workshop with an extended period of
personal entry and exploration of the
very large gymnasium. Spatial and
peripheral alertness was gradually
developed. We encouraged individuals
to improvise their personal warmup. At-
tention to breath and the forces of gravi-
ty upon the body were emphasized.
There were a few people with previous
experience in Contact Improvisation,
disabled people in both manually-
operated and motorized wheelchairs, a
146 CQ/CT Sourcebook
Naomi and David find ways of support in the chair.
blind woman, a deaf woman, and others
with lesser physical limitations or injury-
related conditions. Many others in the
workshop of approximately sixty peo-
ple were able-bodied and interested in
Contact as well as in learning within this
particular situation. There was a high
level of enthusiasm and willingness to
develop playfulness and physical con-
tact. The speed was faster than we had
anticipated. We began to slow the
overall pace and look toward a deepen-
ing of the process through which we
move into contact with greater sensitivi-
ty and awareness. Those of us who
could fall and enter the floor did so,
while others stayed in their chairs, relax-
ing into the "small dance" that can be
felt in a sitting position. The forms of
contact between able and disabled
movers slowly revealed the ways in
which a person in a wheelchair often
must teach and become the initiator
when their partner is feeling awkward
and tentative. It seemed to be equally
important to allow that partner time to
get in touch with their awkwardness.
As we moved with one another in an
increasingly more mindful and physical-
ly alert manner, our specific strengths
became more apparent. When Michael
Goldhammer explained to me that his
head and neck muscles were the most
powerfully developed extension of his
body, we both found much pleasure in
feeling the exchange of one another's
strength and support.
"O
:r
0
:::c
" c.
~
Volume 13 1988
(cont'd)
11-year old Jessica and Karen Nelson rolled and rolled and rolled together.
(from floor up) Michael, Jessica, David, Roger, with
Steve Christiansen videotaping.
Gwenneth van Frank and Michael Goldhammer head dance.
Roger Kerns about to join the log roll.
Louise Richards guides us through "log rolling" across a sea of partners.
all photos by Heidi Timm except where noted
Volume 13 1988 CQ/CI Sourcebook 147
Later in the morning, we had people
combine in small groups where each
person was gently rocked and rolled
along the floor. Particular focus was
placed on the head-neck joint, inviting
restful and fluid movement to be pass-
ed through the body. Counter-balancing
with a partner was also explored in
various positions, each person using
whatever degree of movement and flex-
ibility they had in their arms. A person
in a wheelchair could lean their weight
off the side of the chair so that they
wouldn't be pulled too far forward or
out from their chair by their partner's
leverage.
In the afternoon, Kevin and Louise
introduced a different form of a
gauntlet (two parallel lines of people
facing each other) where one person
slowly walked, wheelchaired, or crawl-
ed through the gauntlet from one end
to the other while everyone in the lines
gently blew upon their clothing and
skin. Sensuality was a powerful and
common feeling for us all. We held a
round-robin toward the end of the day.
There was little reluctance to enter the
circle. We ended the day with a circle
for feedback and discussion.
Day Two
Sunday included quite a few new peo-
ple. We began the morning in a quiet
and more reflective mode. Karen led an
extended warm-up that brought us into
light qualities of contact with one
another, maintaining a feeling of warm-
up without further ambitions. Later, we
covered one half of the space with mats
and introduced "log-rolling." Everyone
lies on their stomach, lined up next to
each other with heads pointing in the
same direction, arms extended
overhead. The contact between the sides
of bodies is tight but flexible. One by
one, a person places him/herself in a
perpendicular direction across the
bodies. Before beginning to log-roll, the
joined bodies gently nudge and ar-
ticulate some small movements upward
to the person they're supporting to give
them a feeling of buoyancy. Then, the
person atop is carried along by the roll-
ing bodies until he or she reaches the
other end. For those people who left
their wheelchairs, this exercise was an
exhilarating way to experience the sup-
portive combination of body, ground,
breath and momentum, essential ingre-
dients of Contact Improvisation.
Staying on mats, we moved into part-
ner work, what we call "low table"
positions. Here, one person is on hands
and knees, while the other partner
148 CQ/CI Saurcebook
drapes him/herself horizontally over the
back of their partner. Gradually, either
partner can initiate some movement,
changing shape and position in whatever
way they are able. Relaxed but alert, the
bodies can feel the force of gravity
through muscles and bones. Higher sup-
port positions were also introduced,
allowing skills for falling and rolling to
be expanded upon. The level of trust,
communication and safety was becom-
ing very apparent as we entered another
round-robin. The dancing was accom-
panied by some friends who played
acoustic and synthesized music along
with vocal improvisations. The
workshop closed with a deep apprecia-
tion for what we all created. The desire
for this work to continue was echoed
throughout the group. [Alan]
IMPRESSIONS
Through the workshop, I learned
about a deeper level of being supported,
and opening my body to trust the sup-
port more, in more directions. This
came after working with Jessica, a girl
whose arms and legs have sensation but
cannot bear weight without additional
bracing or support. Her spinal and tor-
so movement is fluid like a fish and we
had a great time cruising the space by
rolling.
We discovered a way she could wrig-
gle her weight onto me while working
close to the floor. Once I felt the center
of her weight directly on top of me, I
could play with rocking her and shifting
the position of my support under her,
raising the level of the support to hands
and knees. For her it was slightly
delightfully terrifying-"Don't! Don't!
DO! DO! STOP! STOP! GO! GO!!"
So I stayed within her limits of how
much permission to take. Her fear was
of falling on her head without any pro-
tection from her arms while hanging
forward across the bench my body made
for her. Then we played with shifting
her weight towards her feet, just enough
so she could feel the floor through her
flat feet, with most of her weight still
into me. From here I crawled and she
had the sensation of walking, feeling the
floor pass under her feet while she took
steps.
There was something in her courage
to trust my support and to follow her
interests that affected my dancing.
Later, during a round robin, I had a
dance with an able-bodied man I'd
never danced with before, David, where
I gave my center in situations that are
usually slightly delightfully terrifying for
me-up high on a shoulder, hanging up-
side down, the support moving with
momentum, no hands-and I felt deep-
ly relaxed.
I just realized in rewriting this story
that I was in the same situation with
David that Jessica had been in with me.
We truly do instruct each other through
the dancing. [Karen]
"
In reflecting back on what I now
prefer to call the "Dance with Different
Abilities" workshop rather than
"Dance with Different Needs," I ex-
perience an immense gratitude for the
opportunity to not know, to not assume
mobility habitually and to appreciate
more deeply contact in still frames.
Leading a class with physical assump-
tions or habitual statements like "Stand
up," "See the whole space," or giving
any verbal instructions for that matter,
could at times isolate. A good sense of
humor was quickly cultivated. Verbal
interpreting for the blind, sign inter-
preting for the deaf, and a multitude of
modifications allowed for a moment by
moment experience. Along with
everybody else, I seemed to learn a lot
about replacing the use of one sensory
perceptor with another. Seeing with
your skin could not become cliche. My
perceptions began to expand through
the transmission of experience in this at-
mosphere of diverse abilities. Consider-
ing the weight of a partner with a near-
ly total absence of muscular resistance
gave me a profound experience of the
"small dance" and enlightened me
about the sense of an abandoned body
moving through space where my will-
ingness and ability to support was essen-
tial to the pleasure and safety of the
dance. I also did a solo dance with a
wheelchair, lifting it, rolling it over my
back, balancing it on my shoulders. This
allowed me to experience not only the
spirit of the chair but how it was an ex-
tension of its owner's body. The
anatomy of a wheelchair, with or
without a partner in it, was a great
education in mechanics, motion and
caring. The idea that contact improvisa-
tion is an accessible movement form
continues to expand in all directions
regardless of one's physical abilities. A
sense of common ground pervaded the
space. [Alito]
Volume 13 1988
Kevin Fin nan with student at a school for people with disabilities in Nottinghamshire, England.
CONTACT WITH
SPECIAL NEEDS
by Louise Richards
& Kevin Finnan
Whenever we tell people that we
teach contact improvisation to people
with severe physical and/ or mental
disabilities they look at us like we're
bonkers. A dance with somebody who
is paralyzed would appear to be a con-
tradiction. How can you dance if you
can't "move"? The study of contact
teaches that there is always movement
in the body, the continual falling with
gravity, and for somebody prostrate
there is always the movement of the
breath. Where there is movement, no
matter how small, there is the possibili-
ty of a dance. It sounds easy to say, and
obvious, but it took a while for us to
prove it to ourselves. We are Kevin Fin-
nan and Louise Richards and we are
members of New Midlands Dance, a
British community dance company with
a commitment to new dance.
In early 1985 Lesley Hutchison
became Artistic Director of the
Midlands Dance Company which was
until then a traditional contemporary
rep touring company receiving an an-
nual revenue grant from the Arts Coun-
cil. Lesley transformed the company in-
to a community dance resource for the
region. In order to reach the widest
possible range of people within the
region, there would have to be a change
in the company's way of working. New
forms, New methods, New audiences,
New dance!
In the summer of 1985 we joined
Lesley in forming the New Midlands
Dance Company. We decided to focus
on youth and special needs groups, sec-
tors of the community with little or no
access to the arts. Our work involves
both performances and workshops in a
residency format. We have just com-
pleted a year long project with special
needs groups and are about to embark
on a similar project with prison/custody
populations, men, women and children.
Whoever we work with: dancers,
students, old, young, able-bodied or
paralyzed, we have found contact im-
provisation to be an accessible and
engaging form to teach.
Our first real experience with a
physically handicapped group was dur-
ing a week long residency at a school for
children with disabilities in Nottingham-
shire. We had expected to be working
initially with mentally handicapped
groups but to our horror our first
residency of a year of touring was to be
in this school. Residencies are usually
one week long and we work with a core
group plus staff; teaching intensively
Volume 13 1988
CQ/CI Sourcebook 149
and performing once or twice during the
week. We had done a lot of preparatory
work, particularly with mentally han-
dicapped groups but none of this really
prepared us for the first session with fif-
teen wheelchair-bound children. The
group was nervous because they didn't
know what to expect. We were nervous
for exactly the same reason. We started
very timidly, introductions and other
warm-ups in a game format to break the
ice, introducing the notion of touch ear-
ly on.
The group was resistant. They were
handicapped so what could dance
possibly be for them? On top of that
they had all the usual teenage hang-ups
about looking stupid, touching each
other and associating dance with pop
records or ballet. Most of them had up-
per body movement, few of them could
move legs or feet. We worked a lot with
contact through fingertips and heads. In
pairs they started to use their weight
through counterbalance and easy
pushing and pulling. At first there was
a real feeling of them doing it to humour
us, but gradually over the week the pairs
moved into duets. They worked on
shared "journey" dances. For example,
two people in one chair supported
through each other's laps or backs, us-
ing their weight to initiate movement in
each other.
Strong bonds developed within the
group, with each other and with us. The
school is in a beautiful wooded environ-
ment so there were countless invitations
to accompany them on walks on the
special wheelchair trails. It was hard not
to form real attachments with two girls
in the group who took me (Louise) for
regular lunchtime strolls. Going up steep
hills they (in their chairs) left me (on my
legs) standing.
I (Kevin) was invited to play soccer
in the playground with pupils and staff.
I was amazed at the speed and vigour
of the game, wheelchairs and crutches
flying past me. Receiving a great pass
from a young lad in a wheelchair on the
wing and filled with sudden enthusiasm
I turned and volleyed the ball
goalwards, only to see it ping off the
head of a passing lad on crutches-
sending him flying. I was mortified,
what had I done? I could see the
headlines: "Dancer assaults crippled
child." I began apologizing to
everybody. To my surprise this pro-
moted gales of laughter at my expense.
I was learning another seminal lesson:
Just because people are less able in some
way it does not mean that they need to
be wrapped in cotton wool and touch-
ed at arms length. The children were
physically adventurous and were
150 CQ/CI Sourcebook
prepared for physical risk.
Over the week, through the dance ses-
sions we became more confident and
they became more adventurous, taking
full weight, spinning their wheelchairs
and supporting themselves through new
body surfaces. We were successful in
challenging their notions about what
dance was and showed them they could
create their own.
During the project we have worked
with a range of disabilities. With the
chronically disabled we start from relax-
ation, rocking, listening to and work-
ing with the breath rather than impos-
ing movement, allowing ourselves to be
with another body, picking up breathing
rhythms and amplifying them into
shared movement. We don't do to peo-
ple. Even the most handicapped person
can move someone else-we lay our
heads in the bowls of their abdomens
and let their breath move us. A shared
responsibility.
We had a dance with a boy called
David who has head movement but no
other body movement. He was propped
on a cushion, we put our heads together.
We explained to him about listening to
the moving point. Slowly it began to roll
around our heads. Sometimes it would
slide, we'd explain to him that we need-
ed it to roll so that we were moving and
being moved by each other. This
developed into a twenty minute dance
of amazing intensity. David had a huge
grin which never left his face.
We don't just work with children.
Similar work at an adult residential cen-
tre developed much further due to our
increased experience and confidence at
that time. We began with everybody out
of their chairs. Finger dances which roll-
ed down arms and into torsos happen-
ed early in the residency. We taught
about weight and momentum and they
learned that their seemingly immobile
weight could affect change in someone
else. A man called Ian resented being
moved and responded with "I'm not
helpless, you know." We told him he
should move us too and he could do this
by letting his weight fall back, thus pull-
ing us up. We really gave our weight in
these counterbalances. By further using
counterbalance and shared balances
back to back or side to side, people
could support themselves on unfamiliar
levels. By using the natural ledges on
our bodies, backs, hips and thighs, we
would feed their weight through our
bodies in the passage from up to down.
We used a lot of "body surfing" and
"log rolling" and developed ways of us-
ing table work both as supporter and
supported. For example, people with
upper body movement were able to use
their arms as levers to get on and
balance on our backs, and were often
able to sit on their folded legs and use
their arms as main supports to take our
weight through their backs. With
careful regard to the weight, this
developed into a dance, transferring
support between us, swapping roles and
using flow and momentum to move.
Early rocking developed into tumbl-
ing, throws and catches where people
could experience spatial disorientation.
It is impossible to explain people's joy
in this work. For more nervous people
we made physical structures to give
movement experiences. For example, in-
terlocked human "tables" became a
mobile support structure. One woman
lay on the backs looking at the ceiling
and said "I've never been upside-down
before."
It is not always possible for people to
communicate verbally as to whether or
not we are achieving anything, par-
ticularly when mentally handicapped.
However we believe the dance com-
municates on a very deep level. In one
session a man got quite violent. He was
working with one of our helpers and
started to lash out with his fists. In-
tuitively I (Louise) grabbed his wrists
but rather than blocking and restrain-
ing him I began to move with him.
Gradually his energy changed from con-
frontation to flow.
Sandra was a group member who
gave no sign of recognition from one
session to another. She didn't seem to
understand any of the work we were do-
ing. One of our warm-up exercises in-
volves passing a touch point from finger
to finger around the circle. On the very
last day I (Kevin) made a point of say-
ing goodbye to her. As we were leaving
she came up, did a wonderful "finger
dance" and touched her finger to the
end of mine. I was speechless, shocked
and deeply moved.
There are many of these stories and
we've chosen these few to try to convey
at least a feeling of the work. What
seems to be a daunting task is incredibly
rewarding. We are not therapists but
dancers who teach dance to people
whatever their abilities because we
believe that dance is for all. We haven't
space here to discuss our performance
work in this context, although it too is
an integral part of the work. Maybe that
will be another article. Certainly we plan
to write another installment on our ex-
periences teaching contact in custodial
settings. tr
Volume 13 1988
Louise Richards and Kevin Finnan teach
"log-rolling" to staff at a Nottinghamshire
school for people with disabilities f left].
Louise works with student [below .
Volume 13 1988
CQICI Sourcebook 151
This man could only move his head. He
used that motion to initiate movement
which built from small rocks to larger
body rides.
Four interlocked bodies become a
mobile support structure.
People with upper body movement use
their arms as levers and their legs hang
from our backs.
152 CQICI Sourcebook Volume 13 1988
BEGINNERS DANCE
by Marie Mannschatz
It is my first contact class after a
seven year break and the first dance at
all after months of painful resistance
against any engagement in the moving
arts. A friend has convinced me to par-
ticipate in this Contact Improvisation
workshop taught by Nancy Stark Smith
in Spain, north of Barcelona.
Very slowly I settle back into the
body, keeping my vital forces way down
inside. The air around me stays empty
and my heart aches in consequence of
neglecting its basic needs.
The teacher tells us to kneel down and
connect with the crowns of our heads.
A tall young dancer with sea-blue eyes
slips towards me and offers his head.
Our bodies hardly move while we sit
quietly tuning to each other. Through
my skull I feel the pulsation of his spinal
liquid, the rhythm of his blood, feel my
hesitant expansion towards him and
decide carefully to open up a little bit
more.
"Let's roll across the floor, keeping
in contact with the top of our heads."
Gliding across the wooden surface we
look for a synchronized movement. His
nose reaches already up into the air,
mine still sticks to the ground.
"Now roll back to the other side of
the hall. Allow yourself to go slow;
when you feel stabilized in your connec-
tion you may want to develop a more
open dance with each other, from time
to time coming back to the head con-
nection."
We exchange no opinions about our
way of working together. His attitude
is serious and alert. We both focus on
our task, intending to align our abilities.
Like siamese twins we are rolling
now, grown together at the crowns of
our heads. My brother starts to guide
me through the space, passing arms,
feet, legs and torsos of other dancers.
He calls me internally and waits for my
answers. His touch is delicate and firm
at the same time. I try to catch an ex-
pression of emotion in his face. His gaze
is relaxed and empty, while he is diving
deeper and deeper into the realms of my
intuitive self.
Reaching a rare level of trust I allow
him to hold me, carry me and let go of
me. For a tiny second I am as happy as
a toddler. But as my mind is realizing
the long lost feeling, it vanishes under
the weight of memory.
My partner keeps moving. Inhaling
the fresh smell of his sweat I curl into
his lap and want to stay there, losing my
sense of self, ready to slip back into the
liquid warmth and timeless security of
a womb.
He keeps moving. He is obviously an
experienced dancer, unlimited in his
gentle presence, clear in his direction,
while my perception is flooded by im-
ages, feelings, rhythms and vibrations.
Like a little boat I am rocking across his
body waves, feeling his bones and soft
Volume 13 1988
stILL G
NfOVI
CQICI Sourcebook 153
tissues communicating with mine. By
now my lungs empty completely. Each
exhalation goes further and is
sometimes accompanied by an un-
conscious sound of agreement. Our
breathing patterns overlap, we lose
culture and age, but I stay always aware
of being a woman.
For the glimpse of a moment a silvery
net is woven around us by dashes of
sunlight, spread all over our bodies. The
next minute we are blades of grass in the
summer wind, intermingling with the
group energy. The two of us are not
alone in this space-we touch others
flying through their territory, grateful:
ly catching the arm that supports us the
moment we lose our balance. A little
laughter jumps out of my throat. Hey,
babe, life can be fun!
No reaction on his side. He always
keeps moving.
Finally we discover our spiral spheres
and now I am expanding completely.
Yes! Fun! Love! Spirals up and down
and up again in different speeds and col-
ours. Spirals towards a subtle
completion.
Our bodies agree to finish the dance.
Gently we unwind the energy threads
which carried the codes of body
language. A few more touches and
swirls and thanks to the floor. Then:
Gravity and empty space.
As soon as the dance is over, the com-
munication system is fallen apart. Here
I am with onehundredtwentyseven ques-
tions I never dare to ask: Is a dance like
this daily life for him? Was the level of
contact my own projection? Did he en-
joy the fluidity of our movements as
well? Which images arose for him?
What did he learn?
The class continues, other dancers
come, but this first dance stays with me.
My questions unfold into an investiga-
tion of relationship-patterns. Something
has been healed inside of me, has been
replaced by soft openness, curiosity and
a need for creative expression.
In the dew of the next morning I sit
down to continue the dance with my
type>,yriter. Across the printed letters my
eyes are wandering towards the milky
bluish mountains in the distance. Birds
busy with being surround me and the
heavy sneeze of a Spanish farmer echoes
through the valley and is answered by
angry barking dogs. *
154 CQ/CI Saurcebook
DEEPENING
by Tom Trenda
Deepening combines elements of
work that I've been doing in The
Tragertm Approach, Authentic Move-
ment, Re-Evaluation (CO-)Counseling,
and Contact Improvisation. This work
was first presented in a class that I
taught with Danny Mack and Susan
Brokaw at the 1987 Breitenbush Jam.
I listened to literally hours of personal
testimony and feedback by highly ex-
perienced contactors after this class,
which indicated to me that I was "on
to something."
This work is not about the advanc-
ing of Contact Improvisation skills ex-
clusively, although from the feedback
I've received, it seems to be very effec-
tive in that way. It can be applied in
various movement contexts, from dance
improvisation to dance therapy. It is a
very specific structured form which
demands a high amount of commit-
ment, attention, and focus.
What is Deepening?
Listening to another while they move
is at the heart of this experience. Like
Authentic Movement, this form is about
one person putting their undivided at-
tention on another, without judgement,
comment, or intentionally shaping their
process. Simply being there with that
person with total commitment to
whatever they do, as "witness" to their
process. Unlike Authentic Movement
however, the "witness" uses not only
their eyes to "pay attention to," but
also their hands and (later) their bodies.
Why touch? Because touch gives a
kind of information that cannot be ob-
tained through just observing. I am not
only looking for the information that I
can get simply from how I see your
movement. This experience is deeply
physical. This kind of connection, this
kind of "being with," is not only
through a visual mode, but includes the
kinesthetic/tactile as well. It is the ex-
perience of seeing, touching, sensing,
and moving with, on all levels of so-
meone's body, from periphery to core.
Feeling experiences which often arise
out of this kind of deep, intimate shar-
ing are those of profound personal
validation and support.
Preparation
I first have people pair up and I teach
basic Trager hands-on skills. With one
person laying on their back, the other
places their hands somewhere on their
partner's body and "settles in." The
focus is on deepening the level of con-
tact with one's hands through the sur-
face structures of their partner's body
such as skin and body shape to the
deeper structures such as skeleton and
organ. Once this kind of contact is sens-
ed, the active partner begins to lightly
rock the body of their partner, sensing
for the movement of the skeleton and
the pathways this movement is travel-
ing on. This works beautifully to drop
people into their body's core, and to
engage them in focusing deeply into
another person's physical structure.
Through the work of Milton Trager, I
have learned that by developing sen-
sitivity in the hands along with the
focusing capacities of the mind, the sur-
face of the body can be penetrated
allowing core structures to be contacted
and moved.
This kind of "penetration" or depth
of touch is necessary in the Deepening
experience. The intent, once this is ob-
tained, however, is not to "do"
anyt~ing with those deeper structures,
but simply to contact them, to listen and
to follow what is happening in there
while that person is moving.
The basic Deepening structure
The basic structure begins with one
person in the pair moving on their own
and the other person observing.
Throughout this whole experience the
person moving is focused on referenc-
ing everything to their own center, edge,
flow, timing, weight, momentum, inten-
tion, etc. In other words, they are solo-
ing. The person watching is following
with their eyes, the whole or any part
of this person's body moving-wherever
their attention is drawn.
Next, the person observing moves in-
to the other's kinesphere and begins to
follow the movement of any part,
[touching it] with their hands. Here it
is helpful for the person moving to work
at a slow pace. This facilitates contact
from hand to body. It is also important
to note here that the person "soloing"
is not initiating or "leading" the other,
but simply moving while someone
moves with them. They are paying at-
tention to their own movement process.
Their partner is also paying attention to
the movement process of the person
soloing, with their eyes and hands and
whole being. This is an experience of
"one-way attention." In other words,
both partners are paying attention to
one person's dance. It sometimes re-
quires an active intention on the part of
Volume 13 1988
the person following to not initiate,
limit, or direct their partner's move-
ment, especially if they have had a lot
of Contact Improvisation experience.
Noticing the subtle ways in which we do
this in Contact Improvisation is one of
the benefits of practicing the Deepen-
ing form. This means that when a move-
ment is going outside of one's reach
space, the follower must simply let it go.
To pull the motion back towards oneself
by changing the pressure would inhibit
the full movement of one's partner.
It is helpful for the kind of deep con-
tact I spoke of earlier that the person
Applying Deepening in a
Contact lmprov context
If I am working with a group of Con-
tact Improvisors, I will have people
focus on bringing the experience from
the edge (hands) to the center (torso),
and throughout the whole body. The
person "paying attention to" their part-
ner (while that person continues to
"solo") begins to use the rest of their
body to follow, track, and read their
partner's movement in just the way that
they were using their hands earlier. Here
I make it clear that it is not about "go-
ing after contact," but is about allow-
0
0
_c
0.
Tom Trenda & Bev Rackoff
following does not ,jump around with
their hands, but rather rests on one body
part, "reading" as much information as
is possible about the whole organism
from that one moving part. There is
everything to be learned about a whole
from any of its parts.
Of course, it is a lie to say that the
person moving is "soloing." As soon as
one is aware of being watched there is
interaction. And when one is being
listened to through touch, there is cer-
tainly a presence there to be reckoned
with. But just as one can do a "solo"
dance piece with many people watching,
one can also solo while being touched
if the person touching has a presence of
respectful attention.
ing any body part that is convenient to
come into this role, as the movement
flows through one's kinesphere. This
prevents people from throwing their
centers into contact. It is O.K. to be in
the way of your partner's motion-you
are a part of the environment in your
partner's dance.
Issues of weight support invariably
come up at this point. Torsos weigh
more than hands. If I am following a
Volume 13 1988
movement with my hand I can be above
or below it, without much change in
weight. But if I follow someone's move-
ment with my torso to a place where I
am on top of them, they are supporting
my weight, but I am supporting their
movement. Similarly, if their movement
takes them to a place on top of me, I
focus on supporting the movement, not
the weight. The focus is not on giving
and taking body weight. This is often
what makes Contact Improvisation so
static: you give me your weight, I'll give
you my weight, and [thus] the dance of
all the signals and responses associated
with this. Weight sharing is one by-
product, just something that happens to
happen, in the process of reading so-
meone's movement with certain parts of
your body in the Deepening form.
At this point, I might suggest the
soloist begin playing with moving faster,
changing levels, and jumping. Or the
partners can allow the roles to dissolve,
keep moving, and take from this struc-
ture anything they feel [like] integrating.
I also structure sessions for specifical-
ly working on connecting in this
Deepening way in running, falling, and
jumping. This seems to be very
challenging-to come into contact with
a quickly moving body without shaping
the course of that jump, run, or fall.
The outcome
Some of the benefits of doing
Deepening are rooted in the fact that it
is about taking turns. How often do we
get to receive such undivided attention
to such a major part of ourselves? To
be supported in whatever we are doing?
Receiving this kind of attention from so-
meone enables one to go deeper into
their own body/movement process. This
form creates a high degree of safety for
people to explore their own movement.
As the person moving, you get very
committed to your own movement
without a lot of ego investment. This
comes from someone else's commitment
to your movement without ego. As the
person following, focusing one someone
else enables you to let go of any of your
own stuff about your own movement.
It takes the focus off yourself and how
well you are dancing.
Through practicing this work a new
relationship to "form" can be
discovered. It could be said that "form
follows following." Awareness of form
grows organically from the inside.
Pathways begin to emerge through the
skin and extend out of (and back into)
the body. It comes unself-consciously
from the mutual commitment to follow-
ing each other's internal movement
pathways. *
CQICI Sourcebook 155
EXPOSED TO GRAVITY
What follows are two essays, one
by each of the initiators of The Ex-
posed to Gravity Project, a col-
laborative organization specializing
in movement arts and education for
physically disabled people.
For more information on their ac-
tivities and videotapes, write to:
The Exposed to Gravity Project,
c/o Alan Ptashek, 5863 Birch
Court, Oakland, CA 94618; Tel.
(415) 653-7098 or 644-8301.
by Bruce Curtis and Alan Ptashek
L
by Bruce Curtis
Often when I would con-
template dancing, and look at all
the wonderful bodies swiftly spinn-
ing and flashing across the floor, it
would seem to me that I was
another species of Human. It felt
much the same way to me upon
traveling to Guatemala, going to the
end of the road in the rain forest,
and then wandering among the
village people that live there. The
people stopped what they were do-
ing and stared at me while I was
staring at them, everyone filled with
curiosity.
Since my body looks different and
moves differently, I've often
wondered, how I can participate in
this dancing when it doesn't seem
that we share a commonality of
movement. I would wonder how
· they ever learned to move like that,
what was their secret? Lots of
classes? Born with rhythm? Survival
of the fittest? It seemed pretty clear
to me, whatever the reason, that for
me to dance, the method would
have to come from my personal ex-
perience of how my body moves,
not from copying how non-disabled
people move.
When I first began to explore
moving my body in rhythm (before
I knew of Contact Improvisation),
I wanted to dance like everyone else
with grand gestures, lots of wiggles
in the right places, relaxed and cool.
But a body in a wheelchair doesn't
seem capable of moving like that
and it was pretty scary to experi-
ment in front of people. So I would
move my shoulders while shifting
my weight to the rhythm of the
music, dancing inside my body with
grand gestures and lots of wiggles.
At some point it occurred to me that
this micro-movement was just as
much dancing as what everyone else
did with their whole body. It may
not have looked the same but the
rhythms flowing through my body,
unlocking the grip of my mind and
fears, came from the same primal
experience. With this realization, I
began to lift my hands, lengthen the
movement of my arms and deepen
my reliance on the validity of the
movements that were emerging
from my body. I found my body
starting to move in patterns that did
not exist in my mind or in my
previous experience. When I would
dance in this manner, and look in-
to the eyes of someone dancing next
to me, a smile would spread across
our faces from the joy in our hearts.
The dance was within us.
I would like to explain very
generally how Spinal Cord Injury
(SCI) affects most bodies. To injure
the spinal cord in the back or waist
can result in paraplegia, with no
muscle control in the waist or legs
but normal use of the arms and
hands. An injury to the neck can
result in quadriplegia. Most
quadriplegics are unable to move
any muscles below a mid-chest
156 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume13 1988
level. Their shoulder, bicep and
wrist muscles are often good with
triceps weak and finger muscles
nonfunctional. In those muscles that
are affected by SCI, sometimes a
movement will create a spasm
which can start a leg or the whole
body shaking or momentarily to go
rigid. Breathing is done through the
diaphragm with each breath being
shallow. There is usually no surface
skin feeling below the mid-chest
level so it is possible to cut or bruise
this area without being aware that
it has happened. (A good visualiza-
tion of how a body like this moves
is to look at a newborn baby. Its
mind does not control how the
head, each limb, or the body as a
whole responds to gravity or posi-
tioning. If the head is not sup-
ported, it will immediately fall.)
Each person's degree of function
varies, depending on the severity of
Volume 13 1988
the original injury, their body tone
before and after the injury, and the
person's willingness to experiment
with their body and environment.
What is most important to
remember is that each body, disabl-
ed or not, is unique and presents
another opportunity to explore
what movement is possible.
I am a quadriplegic but my lower
body is able to feel pressure when
touched and therefore I can usually
guess where my legs or feet are posi-
tioned. Since my feeling is minimal,
I often use my eyes to tell me exact-
ly where my body is. My body is
long (6 ft. 2 in.), lean, limber and
I love it! I have used a wheelchair
for 20 years now, living, working
and playing around the world. My
chair has become a part of my body.
It has movements, sounds and
rhythms that describe the texture of
the ground that I am moving across,
"O
:;,-
0
....
0
@
Alan Ptashek and Bruce Curtis
defining the space that I am passing
through.
Gravity is very noticeable to me
since my muscles cannot stand in
opposition to it. When sitting, my
chair supports me above the
ground. If I lean in any direction too
far away from the center of my sup-
port, gravity will bring me down. I
really don't mind falling down since
it's never that far. My body will
sense a lack of support immediate-
ly and since my muscles can only
delay the fall, I usually don't think
about how to keep from falling, but
rather, how to use the momentum
or a quick push off a nearby surface
to help me arrive on the ground in
a safe manner. Most of the time, I
CQ/CI Sourcebook 157
(cont'd)
just prepare to meet the ground.
Gravity is very constant and
dependable and I use it often to
move my body when my muscles
cannot. When sitting in my chair,
the ground is rarely level under me
and I will feel gravity moving me in
some direction. Since my arms are
not awesome, I am always looking
for ways to ride the flow of gravi-
ty, by analyzing the angle of the
plane of the surface in front of me
and then moving to a point that op-
timizes the motion in the direction
that I want to go. For example,
climbing up a hill against gravity is
made easier by tacking diagonally
across it. Often I will stop to rest by
finding that place of balance where
momentum is briefly suspended bet-
ween possibilities, and then with a
slight push, I will join with the flow
once again. This is how I play while
moving through the world, riding
gravity and looking for cheap
thrills.
I was first introduced to Contact
Improvisation while on the March
for Peace in Central America, 250
people from 30 countries traveling
overland from Panama to Mexico
City. We had stopped for a rest at
a coffee plantation high in the nor-
thern mountains of Nicaragua.
Another marcher, Holly Hamilton,
and I went for a walk and
discovered an abandoned coffee
drying courtyard made of concrete
with a view of the countryside for
30 miles. Since I had a cassette
player with a tape of Andreas
Vollenveider in my backpack, I of-
fered to demonstrate how I could
dance with my chair. To my amaze-
ment, Holly began moving with me
without my having to explain much
at all! After we danced, she told me
about Contact Improvisation and I
decided that this was an important
discovery for disabled people. A
dance form that uses movement,
gravity and their relationship to
each other as revealed through
158 CQ/CI Sourcelx>ok
changing points of balance, seemed
ideal for people like myself whose
daily interaction with their environ-
ment is grounded in the same
experiences.
My first experiments with Con-
tact Improvisors Holly Hamilton
and Arthur Hull involved moving
with my chair in spirals, using the
momentum of my partner as the
force that moved me. Through the
point of contact, I would feel the
potential for movement waiting to
be released, the intention to move
shifting between me and my part-
ner, and for the first time I felt tru-
ly equal in the creating of the dance!
At this stage, I was primarily look-
ing at my dancing like a ballet.
Grand sweeping movements of my
chair without my having to push it.
For me the dance was to move
across the floor in a graceful, fluid
manner, while making interesting
patterns and smooth transitions.
This early work was videotaped and
after showing it to Alan Ptashek, a
great teacher of movement, I began
to learn with him how to have a
physical conversation through the
movement form Contact
Improvisation.
I went through what must be
familiar issues to anyone beginning
to learn the language of Contact Im-
provisation. Keep your eyes open,
don't get lost inside your head.
Look for opportunities to support
your partner, move in underneath
them. Don't give or take weight
without listening for the agreement
of your partner's body. Let each
move evolve from mutual agree-
ment, rather than having an image
in your own mind dictate what hap-
pens next. Mutual trust is based on
uncompromised attention, so stay
in the present moment.
In the beginning, my interest in
Contact Improvisation was always
oriented towards performing a
choreographed dance by stringing
together all the fascinating moves
and deleting the "dull" spaces in bet-
ween. When we began practicing
for our first performance, I would
always be asking Alan what move-
ment we would start or finish with.
It wasn't until the last rehearsal,
while feeling totally nervous, I
realized that without a
choreographed plan of action, our
practices were always full of ex-
citing moments of improvisation.
Since Alan and I were creatively and
unhesitatingly exploring our
possibilities, what emerged was a
fascinating conversation of move-
ment. I also learned how important
it was to remember to have fun
while dancing. So, I started playing
with Alan the same way that I
would play off the wall in a hallway
or moving through cars while cross-
ing the street. Being spontaneous
and playing together with gravity.
When I· first started practicing
Contact Improvisation, it was
necessary for me to have music
playing in the background. It was
a strong habit- if you want to
dance, put on some music. Initial-
ly, Alan discouraged this because
the body tends to move to the
rhythm of the music, instead of to
the internal rhythm of shifting
weight, sensation and the com-
munication that goes back and forth
between the dancers. As I listened
more intently to Alan's body
through the point of contact,
minutely increasing or decreasing
pressure against my body, I would
notice afterwards that I couldn't
remember hearing the music while
we danced. The attention of my
mind was so focused that music, au-
dience, monitoring my self-image,
everything external to the next
movement vanished. Now when we
practice, we sometimes turn off the
music to listen to the sounds of our
breathing or the squeaks and
grunts. At performances we used
taped or live music to help fill in the
environment for the audience as
well as set up an emotional mood.
The first time Alan lifted me out
of my chair, I had no idea what was
happening until I was looking down
from his shoulders. For a person in
a wheelchair, control over your own
body's safety is never easily relin-
quished to someone else's judge-
ment. My life is full of people who
want to help me by grabbing my
body or my chair and dragging me
somewhere in an unsafe manner.
On top of Alan's shoulders I could
feel the ground through his body
solidly supporting me against gravi-
ty. Whether sitting in a chair or
wrapped around someone's body,
when I feel supported against the
Volume 13 1988
flow of gravity, it isn't scary to let
go of holding on and explore new
possibilities. Once after a perfor-
mance Alan said, " ... when we
dance together, I always feel that
when I offer you two different op-
tions, your response is Yes-Yes. I
rarely feel that you resist what I of-
fer you." One reason for this is
because I explore my movement by
playing off of Alan's movement, any
movement, they all have
possibilities. Another reason is that
you don't have to say no to someone
who is listening to your body.
In the beginning, I was concern-
ed about how I looked while I was
dancing. Was I sitting up straight or
slumped down. If my leg began to
spasm, jumped out straight and
started shaking, what would people
think? In our discussions about
these concerns, we agreed that these
were not problems but oppor-
tunities. They were not to be ig-
nored, feared or repressed. The
point was not to clamp down and
control my body but to listen to it,
accepting whatever movement was
inherent. If a spasm did occur, we
would just keep on dancing and let
it happen, allowing the spasm to
become part of the dance.
Sometimes we would play off of the
spasm, with Alan taking a rigid leg
and using it as a pivot point to move
my chair in a spiral. When we don't
make fences around our bodies, all
movements become acceptable.
Two weeks ago, I began practic-
ing Contact Improvisation with Pat-
ty Overland, a disabled woman
who uses a wheelchair. She had very
little prior experience with Contact
and I had never tried to teach it to
anyone. So while we were trying to
figure out how two people in
wheelchairs do Contact, she was
learning how to improvise her own
ways of playing and shaping our
duet. Even though music helped her
to be more comfortable, (Patty was
used to moving her body in rhythm
to rock-n-roll), we had to turn off
the music so that she could easily
listen to my body through hers. It
is difficult to stay in close contact
with each other because the chairs
are rigid and don't wrap around
each other like bodies do. Both of
Volume 13 1988
us have limited use of our waist
muscles, (and her right shoulder is
weak), so, it has forced us to experi-
ment a lot. We have to lean out
away from our chairs to remain in
contact while allowing enough
space for our chairs to move off the
momentum from the shifting
balance between us. We have also
started working off each other's
chairs like they were bodies. Since
we feel that our chairs are part of
ourselves, it feels natural to grab
hold of or push off of a chair if it
is in front of us at the moment. Last
week, I discovered that she could
get out of her chair, down to the
floor and then back into her chair
fairly easily, so we started incor-
porating this into our dancing.
We feel it is important that the
dance comes from the realities of
our bodies and our chairs, rather
than trying to move like non-
disabled dancers. We have a rela-
tionship with our disability that has
three parts-how our bodies move,
how our chairs move and how they
both move together. There is a great
joy that comes from coaxing a sub-
tle, minute movement from a part
of our bodies that we do not con-
trol and then using the momentum
of the changing point of balance
between us, to slowly begin turning
a wheel in a sweeping arc. Since Pat-
ty and I did not know each other
personally before we started danc-
ing, or the specifics of each other's
body, it has been emotionally scary
to explore how to combine all of
these variables, while trying to be
relaxed and comfortable enough to
encourage our creativity. Our will-
ingness to expose our awkwardness
could become stifled because on the
way to practice, someone on the
street has once again violated our
personal space or negatively af-
fected our self-image so that when
we arrive, our bodies aren't really
open to being vulnerable. If our
fears don't get in the way, the
mechanics of moving can make it
difficult for us to keep our com-
munication tightly focused without
interruption. For example, when
our bodies are not centered in our
chairs, there is a strong habit to stop
dancing for a moment, straighten
ourselves, and then continue. Yet,
working within the physical limita-
tions that we have sometimes re-
quires us to break physical com-
munication long enough to make
the next move possible.
When you are in the present mo-
ment and listening to your partner's
body, the point of contact can
bridge the empty space between
your bodies until the dance brings
you both home again.
So what do I share in common
with all those wonderful dancing
bodies gracefully spinning and
flashing all over the floor? Another
wonderful body filled with the
movements of the glorious life that
is within every part of me, just try-
ing to let those movements come
out in all their joyful wiggles and
spontaneous jumps. Another danc-
ing body that is laughing and play-
ing with the rhythms that join my
body with someone else's body,
communicating in the most intimate
way our willingness to open our
hearts and be vulnerable to each
other. We are all dancing bodies,
playing together to ignite the light
that shines from our eyes and our
smiles to touch the souls of all who
can see us dancing.
I am a disabled person who has
spent half of my life trying to open
more possibilities in society for
myself and other disabled people
through legislation, civil rights
demonstrations, community
organizing and the Independent Liv-
ing Movement. Yet all of these ac-
complishments have not caused the
able bodied stranger that I would
encounter in my work to open their
hearts and let their eyes show how
happy they were to see me. I feel
that it is just as important to talk
about what we as human beings
share in common as it is to show it;
through the joy that we have in each
and every one of our physical
movements, through the
fearlessness of our hearts which has
been.forged by the daily journeys in-
to the dark of our souls, and
through the beauty of ourselves that
we are willing to reveal to the
ablebodied and the disabled
strangers that we meet. As disabled
people, we have shown that we can
survive in this world, now it is time
to show that we can dance too. The
world needs our joy, our dancing.
0
CQ/CI Sourcebook 159
EXPOSED TO GRAVITY
II.
by Alan Ptashek
In the SUllllller of 1986, Bruce
Curtis called me and introduced
himself as a physically disabled man
who had become very interested in
Contact Improvisation. He describ-
ed his previous experiences with this
movement form as well as his
travels within and outside of the
United States. Without having met
him, I was already seeing Bruce in
terms of the mobility and curiosity
that had led him to explore Contact
Improvisation, a dance form that I
have been practicing, developing
and teaching since 1974. I was also
thinking of how I might interact
with a person who has spent more
than half of his life in a wheelchair.
I knew that within myself and most
able-bodied people, there exists a
wide array of pre-conditioned
responses and behavior that has
limited and confused our interac-
tions with disabled people. At the
extremes of one's discom-
fort/ awkwardness with disabled
people (and vice-versa), we may un-
consciously be physically distancing
ourselves, avoiding direct or sus-
tained eye contact, or behaving in
an overly protective manner.
As I viewed tapes of Bruce's
earlier dances, I felt excited by the
possibilities for developing a
physical vocabulary between us,
one that could challenge and ex-
pand previously held ideas about
the limits of movement for those
with spinal cord injuries. Bruce and
I acknowledged that there was
much more ground to explore, and
we began a regular practice of Con-
tact Improvisation, a collaboration
that held equal amounts of en-
thusiasm, caution and wonderment
for both of us.
Learning where and how one's
Contact partner senses and carries
their center of gravity is essential to
the development of trust and
physical rapport. Bruce's wheelchair
was an immediate part of that lear-
ning for me. The man and his
wheelchair are definitely not in-
separable, and a constant awareness
needs to be maintained for intuitive-
ly and· reflexively determining the
boundaries and shifts of balance
Alan Ptashek and Bruce Curtis
between Bruce's body and the struc-
weight exchange and shared move-
ture of his chair. In another sense,
ment and stay open to sudden im-
I often feel Bruce's chair as an ex-
pulses and influences upon either of
tension of his total physicality, sen-
our bodies, a playful, energetic and
sing the combined weight of body
innovative dance is created. An
and chair as one moving mass. By
essential quality of improvisation is
placing my arm, hand or larger sur-
an appreciation for what is taking
face area of my body, such as my
place within the present moment of
back or hips, in contact with any
one's awareness. Following our in-
surface of Bruce's body, I gain im-
stincts and trusting our inherent
mediate access to sensation, mo-
bodily wisdom will guide us toward
tion, breath and balance in Bruce's
our next perception, feeling and
body as he moves in his chair. If my
action.
hand places a gradually increased
As our practice has continued
amount of weight around the side
during the past year, Bruce and I
of, or at the back of Bruce's head,
have become much less protective of
I can use his responding movement
one another, more open about our
and weight exchange as it enters my
confusion, discomfort or expecta-
hand (which is spread and channel-
tions. We move together, with
ed throughout my entire body). I
Bruce in and out of his chair, both
feel and image his entire spine mov-
on the ground and at higher levels
ing downward through the chair's
from the floor, where Bruce can be
seat cushion, feeling his spine
supported around my hips or
rooting into the floor. There is a
shoulders. Sudden lifts of Bruce's
corresponding upward movement
body from either his chair or the
through his spine and head into my
ground create momentum for spins
hand, as contact and awareness of
and swift descents back to the
these multi-directional forces of
ground. We've practiced basic skills
gravity and momentum are
for relaxing the body as we spill in-
established. As both of us maintain
to the floor from higher support
this bodily-felt relationship to
positions. As with many Contact
160 CQ/CI Sourcebook
u
:s
0
0
@
Volume 13 1988
Improvisation duets, the high
velocity of movement and risk bet-
ween Bruce and myself rriay sudden-
ly be experienced as a heightened
state of alertness and precision, our
awareness of time and space relax-
ed and expanded, moving safely
through our movement possibilities.
Bruce's wheelchair is surprising-
ly light and responsive to subtle
degrees of weight and momentum,
although it is Bruce's receptivity to
those subtleties that determines how
my body and movement can shape
itself with his chair. I have leaned
and thrown my weight on Bruce
and his chair from many angles and
impulses. We have occ"asionally
fallen onto one another's body and
the floor, with the chair somehow
cooperating for our safety and con-
tinued contact with each other.
Neither of us have ever been injured
in our dancing.
Our warm-ups include taking
weight across one another's back
and hips, counter-balancing
through the extension and grip of
each other's arms and hands, slow-
ly stretching and releasing tension
from muscle and joints. We focus
deeply on internal awareness of
breathing and finely-tuned balance.
Where certain areas of Bruce's
spinal and muscular functioning is
limited, I have developed an in-
tuitive capacity to locate those parts
of his limbs and torso where he can
initiate movement, and direct the
needed amount of pressure to sus-
tain our surface of contact without
slipping or losing our communica-
tion. Whether this limited physical
functioning is within his fingers or
around his pelvis, there is always
enough time and attention for us to
kinesthetically scan through our
bodies for other areas of strength,
support and balance. It is this "scan-
ning" that creates the movement
vocabulary which is shared between
Bruce and myself.
Our work together has been
observed and commented on by
movement and somatic educators,
dance and physical therapists, per-
forming artists and other people
with physical disabilities, both less
and more severe than Bruce's. We
have performed before a variety of
audiences within the San Francisco
Bay Area, most recently through
The John F. Kennedy Center's
Special Arts International Program,
at Grace Cathedral Church and at
The New Performance Gallery.
University and cable TV stations
have produced and aired tapes of
our work. Exposed to Gravity:
Two Men Dancing, a video edit of
our work, has been screened at
various educational video festivals
in the U.S., Mexico, Brazil,
Nicaragua and China. Our practice
sessions and video tapes have been
viewed by individuals and groups
who are interested in movement and
body awareness for those with
spinal cord injuries.
Bruce and I do not look upon our
dancing as a particular form of
rehabilitative or therapeutic work,
although those aspects and benefits
are acknowledged and may be ap-
plicable in working with other
disabled people and those who are
interested in movement education
and disabilities. In our collabora-
tion, there isn't any specific condi-
tion that we are judging or attemp-
ting to change. Contact Improvisa-
tion is very much of a self-informing
movement practice in which the
participants are continually
recognizing and adapting to the
changing circumstances of their
mutual dance. Bruce and I are con-
scious of the kinesthetic and pro-
prioceptive experiences that are for-
ming our individual patterns of
movement, as well as the quality of
the contact between us.
New movement capabilities in
spinal-injured people is an issue that
Bruce and I have discussed with
great interest and enthusiasm,
especially after we've danced. These
discussions are filled with the im-
ages and sensations that linger long
past the actual dancing. While
Bruce cannot outwardly move his
legs, I know that he can feel a cer-
tain amount of pressure from my
weight resting or rolling across the
bones in his legs. A greater amount
of my weight across the same area
may create some sensation or feel-
ing of contact with the floor beneath
him, as well as that same pressure
sending sensation, feedback, im-
pulse and action to other areas of
his body. We do not have to stop
and reflect on these sensations, as
we are continually listening through
the natural momentum that carries
and sustains our dancing. What re-
n;iains important to my participa-
t10n and learning is that I maintain ~
· Alan Ptashek and Bruce Curtis
"O
:y
o
0
@
:r:
,,.,
3
Volume 13 1988
CQ!CI Sourcebook 161
Bruce Curtis (left) and Alan Ptashek
an active and attentive relationship
to all areas of Bruce's body
throughout the time of our dancing.
There are no "dead" or unfeeling
parts of Bruce in my relationship to
him as a moving human body who
is as fully involved in the life of our
dance as I am. Comparisons bet-
ween our abilities are limiting and
too predictable if based solely on
physical skill and functioning. Our
minds, hearts and creativity join us
in deep and powerful ways, that in-
tegrate and often transcend the ob-
vious physical differences in our
bodies.
In a Contact Improvisation
dance, there are somatic activities
taking place on many levels of con-
sciousness and perception. The
glandular and neuromuscular
systems are being filled with sensa-
tion, becoming a direct source for
the communication between still or
moving partners. What is happen-
ing while we are rolling, falling and
162 CQ/CI Sourcebook
guiding ourselves and partner via
the feedback exchanged through
skin, nervous system and internal
organs? As our body spins and sud-
denly shifts from standing or sitting
in a chair to balancing on arms or
head, what accompanying changes
are ignited through the body as
cerebra-spinal fluid or adrenal
gland activity pulses through the
moving partners? To what extent
does emotional excitement play
upon the ability to feel movement
and expand ourselves motionally?
In my movement with Bruce, these
questions and interests arise and
provide direction for our future ex-
plorations. I'm reminded of a par-
ticular image described by Bruce
after one of our practice sessions.
He referred to parts of his pelvis and
legs as having "black holes,"
whereby reaching through his senses
he goes "fishing with the flashlight
of my awareness" into those black
holes, in a sense, providing the
pathway for sensations to be felt.
Movement can't be forced in any
"O
::;,-
0
0
@
body. Desire and risk are called
upon if there is to be a deepened and
more fully conscious movement for
any human being.
As we continue our collabora-
tion, Bruce and I are interested in
moving with other disabled and
able-bodied people, and in offering
lecture-demonstrations and
workshops. We want to work with
other individuals, groups and
organizations who support the
development of movement
arts/ education as a valuable and in-
spiring basis for play and com-
munication for people of all levels
of ability and disability. In these
ways, Bruce and I hope to further
explore and share with others a
dance and dialogue that we have
delighted in. 0
Volume 13 1988
Yes, a group of us have been contacting
regularly here in metropolitan RICHMOND,
[VIRGINIA] and s!owly rousing the curiosi-
ty of others. "ls it a sport?" "Oh, it's
choreographed." Anyway, recently DENNY
SORENSON, ED CLAP, KEN
MANHEIMER, SUZANNE NAY and I per-
formed publicly and in my attempt to
understand, at least translate my experience
into words, I've written some reflections
from the day:
Contact in an Alley
I had noticed the fluorescent flyers stapl-
ed to the walls of Fulton School. How could
I miss them amid the otherwise drab chip-
ped paint on the walls? I picked up an orange
one from a table in one of the halls, studied
the collage which incorporated the Rich-
mond skyline atop a pile of rubbish, then
read its only words, "Ram Cat Gallery," and
wondered why I had never heard about this
gallery before. Was this to be a new display
space for art?
Several weeks later, Suzanne Nay, one of
the members of the group I'd been doing
Contact lmprov with, asked me whether I'd
be interested in participating in Ram Cat
Gallery. To her I addressed a barrage of
questions.
Downtown Richmond is laced with a net-
work of alleys. Usually you only know the
one behind your apartment and the one
behind your workplace. Although I'm
familiar with many more (they're great for
evening walks), I had never encountered the
alley called Ram Cat. It's a typical cob-
blestone alley, out of the way, unknown but
to a few, and like every alley, used regular-
ly by sanitation engineers. This section of
town like all of historic Richmond had its
peculiar sites and stories. At one end of the
alley stands a three story milk bottle,
in 1913 the home of a dairy, and at the
other end, the studio of Blab TV, a local
cable show featuring philosophers
er ... um ... publicly blabbing.
Several artists, Suzanne one of them, had
chosen Ram Cat as a site for visual artists,
musicians and performing artists to showcase
their wares. Did I want to partake in this
event by doing Contact outdoors? I said yes
and several days later, a few days before the
show, investigated the space which I quick-
ly found to be full of glass, parts of pipes,
strips of wood and a hodgepodge of other
items that would make dancing much more
than a challenge. After envisioning myself
rolling across the ground, rising with my face
and limbs bloodied by what I had en-
countered en route, I considered renegging
on my previous agreement. Art for art sake
is fine but blood is blood.
Despite promises of a cleanup, we who
had agreed to perform continued to enter-
tain the idea of merely playing spectators that
day, a much safer role. Then the carpet was
rolled in and once unfurled, five gleeful
dancers pou need on it to begin to ex-
perience Contact in the wilds of a Richmond
alley.
Relatively new to Contact, I found alley
dancing invigorating. How could I not res-
pond to the fifty-year-old, keyless piano (us-
ed as accompaniment for another dance)
found amid a pile of Coke bottles, men's
Volume 13 1988
shoes, t-shirts, tires, used condoms and other
artifacts of American culture? Beneath two
trees growing out of brick walls, we tumbl-
ed, pushed, pulled, and leaped in response
to each other but also in response to the sun,
the fresh air and to the angles of the buildings
unique to Ram Cat.
Whether we were conscious of it or not
at the time, our dance was influenced by the
environment. We all later agreed how the
quality of our moves differed from those per-
formed in our usual wooden floor, high ceil-
ing dance space. The cushion the carpet pro-
vided made our more pedestrian moves such
as walking and crawling more springy and
made falling less threatening. The slight in-
cline of the ground sometimes contributed
to the momentum and direction of a roll. Be-
ing outdoors, reminiscent of children on
recess, allowed us to be more playful.
Although we more or less stayed within the
confines of the carpet, a space much smaller
than what we were used to, the diminished
size did not diminish the breadth of our ex-
pression. With the idea of performance in
mind, we had earlier given ourselves a time
limit, but while dancing it was obvious that
we didn't want to stop.
The rawness of the alley suits Contact.
Contact is not sterile or refined, a manufac-
tured product assuaging a public that wants
art to be more or less predictable and
beautiful, pleasant enough to be displayed
like souvenirs from last summer's trip to
Europe. Contact is more primitive, disregar-
ding etiquette and incorporating a full range
of human expression. Bodies intermingle in-
timately continually. Bodies graze and press
against each other with the ease of a chat
and the impassioned eloquence of
discourse. The aim of Contact is not to create
forms, to reach toward lofty ideals or vulgar
ones, but to sustain a gestural communica-
tion with another. The product, then, is the
result of dancers exchanging their weight
and support with integrity, innocence and
responsibility. The power of the form
originates in its authenticity, in presenting the
dance in its moment of becoming.
This, it seems, is where the element of im-
provisation comes in. Improvisation stems
from a source that is not solely intellectual
but integral. Not only the mind but the body
too generates the composition. The Carte-
sian problem of dualism disappears, neither
mind nor body attributed with greater heirar-
chical importance. The composition is a fu-
sion of the self as whole. Out of this concor-
dance, spontaneous movements arise
naturally and last as long as the dancers are
able to sustain its many evolutions.
More than any other dance form, Contact
resembles life, at least my life with its cons-
tant flux and need to make decisions within
a moment's notice. The improvisational
movements are organic, not polished time
after time in the studio, and are influenced
constantly by whomever I come in contact
with.
The alley has contributed to the group's
general knowledge of Contact. I know also
that it affected some of the spectators.
Several days after we had danced, a friend
of mine mentioned how she had gone to a
museum and left after ten minutes. Her
reason: the controlled and lifeless environ-
ment contradicted the intention of art. She
had been touched by the vitality of the alley.
[Cheryl Pallant]
CQ!CI Sourcebook 16.3
... WITH AWARENESS
by Darshana Ellis
I've played with dancing and teaching
C.I. for about 8 years and something
hits me continually-if your own
awareness isn't with your self before
you touch someone else, it won't feel
half as nice and will appear "not to
work." We all know the contrast of a
dance that culminates in luxurious bliss
versus one whose consequence is bruis-
ed body or soul.
So now, how?: Bringing conscious
presence into anything creates medita-
tion (and some very nice dance
material).
Starting with the rudimentary (thin
air), some breathing techniques that
help remind us what we're doing:
1) On your own, lying on the back (or
front), using the floor for resistant
reference, explore the breath's travel
into the lower belly, throughout the
ribcage and high into the entire lung,
chest cavity. This exercise is best ver-
bally guided: anatomical reminders
are great, e.g., open around the
clavicle, deep into the armpit,
ar.ound the sacrum, etc.)
2) In partners, one partner lying on
their back, other lies over them
perpendicularly, face down, belly to
belly. Partner on top may have to
take some weight on their elbows and
knees for comfort's sake, to begin.
Partner on bottom initiates a low,
deep, slow belly breath, partner
following. Try breathing in opposi-
tion, Jetting your partner push the
breath out of you then Jetting gravi-
ty create space in the belly for the in-
coming breath.
3) Coming back to the breath. During
any contact exercise or warm-up
(anytime) if the dancer(s) get side-
tracked, lost or sleepy-stop, to come
back home, breathe first.
4) Running, one of the best reasons in
the world to breathe. I will run 5
miles sometimes just to give my lungs
an excuse to breathe. Running
backward, downhill, relaxed and
breathing softly, is meditation. In-
doors, if your space allows, even
short runs with the breath slow, deep
and relaxed help the body become
softer and more quiet in motion. Try
sideward and backward relaxed runs,
fast and slow, alone and with
partners.
Like the ultimate in love brings you
back to yourself, the ultimate dance
form takes you home to your body,
heart and awareness. -tr
DARSHANA ELLIS is a dancing foal and
a teaching cantactar in San Diego, Calif
Karen Nelson and Alito Alessi
164 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Volume 14 1989
Volume 14
1989
Editor
Note
LIST OF EVERYTHING (PARTIAL)
When I mentioned the List
Issue to Susan Schell this morning,
she smiled sheepishly and reached
into her shirt pocket to show me her
list for the day. Lists are everywhere,
especially when you're looking: menus,
road signs, people at this breakfast
place, conversations overheard, things
to do, ways to begin.
Last fall, in Banyoles, Spain, for my
second workshop there, I sat on the
stony terrace thinking about what
material I'd present in the classes. The
notebook I'd brought was nearly empty
and I decided to make a list of all the
exercises, concepts, images, activities,
principles and structures I could think
of that I'd been working with during
the past 15 years.
I made the list over several sittings
and kept coming back to add more. It
was amusing to try to think of every-
thing. Some forms that I remembered
were still alive, others just a record of
where life once was. Many of the new-
er ones were still too unformed to be
co.ntained in a few words; I didn't know
them intimately enough to give them
names. In reading the list over now, I
can feel myself read dimension into
the words. It's like a class list: before
the class begins it's just a list of names,
afterwards it's a list of people.
So here it is, played from move to
mind to hand to mouth to word to
word to word, part (space permitting)
of the partial list of everything:
falling in the 6 directions
rolling up the body
joy kicks
jump start
slow dive to the center of the earth
round robin
domino falls
sloughing
surfing
safari roll
nose as a measure
3 minute class
spinal rock
the wringer
throws and catches
empty/full
high posts
low tables
rolling into the sunset
3 by Ss, 3 by 1 Os
5 by 5s
solo duet solo duet
dance while considering: your mother,
the ocean
oceanic state
time states-slow, med, fast, faster
pre-character states
pre-contact states
the elements-earth, air, fire, water, ether
shakedown
come as you are
alternating current
headstand, handstand
jog and fall
walk and feel
pass the squeeze
pass the dance
flying angel
sweeps
1 /2 stand 1 /2 walk
slow mo weight reversals
finger ouija
loft lift-pas de deux (behind)
light touch
arm drop
calling the end
here! here!
Nancy Stark Smith
Volume 14 1989
CQ/CI Sourcebook 165
"Dance with Different Needs" performance, Eugene, Oregon, March 1988.
A RESPONSE
from Susan Schell
I have recently become very ex-
cited by developments in Contact
between ablebodied and disabled
dancers. At A Cappella Motion
workshop this past summer there
was a v.ideo that Karen [Nelson] and
Alito [Alessi] brought from the
[Dance With Different Needs]
workshop that took place in Oregon
and then the report about it in the
last issue as well as the articles by
Bruce Curtis and Alan Ptashek.
This new growth in the form
seems to have the potential of shed-
ding light on some of the questions
that have surfaced through the years
about elitist tendencies in Contact. I
have never felt the limitations of the
form to be carried by any one per-
son in a dance; rather, it is determin-
ed by the willingness of those par-
ticipating to commit to the realities
of their exchange instead of what
they wished it would or would not
be. I think this kind of attending to
oneself and each other can be ex-
hausting or the assumption is that it
would be, so an easier duet with
''somebody who can really dance" is
often the option taken. As a result,
some of the most potentially
challenging and possibly growth pro-
ducing duets are aborted or avoided
altogether. Perhaps it has something
to do with our perception of what it
means to be challenged. Our skills
can be even more limiting than
another's lack of skill if we do not
find ways to make our experience
available to those we dance with.
Otherwise, all our much sought after
skills begin to isolate us and become
the sign posts of exclusion rather
than routes of access.
This kind of attentiveness to one
another and the dancing was
palpable for me in both the video
that I watched of the workshop and
in the writings of Bruce, Alan, Karen
and Alito in CQ. I will be very in-
terested to see/ experience the effects
of this work on all our dancing in
the future.
One parting question-what is a
"bad dancer?" u
SUSAN SCHELL has been teaching Con-
tact Improvisation and performing since
1977. She has worked in Authentic Move-
ment for the past six years and is current-
ly co-directing a 9 month intensive pro-
gram in the form.
166 CQ/CI Sm1rcebook
HIER- VISIBILITY
by Steve Paxton
Let me see. I gather egalitarianism
and hierarchy are opposed in the title
of Cynthia Novack's columns in the last
"Still Moving" section ["Egalitarianism
and Hierarchy in Contact Improvisa-
tion,'' CQ Vol. XIII no. 3]. I fear a trip
has been laid on us by some free-
associating dance critic who once
described CI as more democratic than
other dance forms. I sort of remember
that line getting picked up by subse-
quent reporters-freecwheeling, dance
for folk, etc., that kind of image aris-
ing uncensored, unexamined and
perhaps unverified. In fact, until
Novack questioned me recently, I don't
recall any of the many dance writers
asking about this point.
Egalitarianism resulted in democracy,
our 'form' of government. This was op-
posed to monarchy-Geo Washington
was offered the monarchy for the states
of America, I once learned. So that sort
of hierarchy was avoided by democratic
government. But a hierarchy, a tern~
porary one, is what we use to run the
country.
I believe I agree with Dumont's thesis.
Agreeing on values creates constraints
on individual directions. And humans
are a communicating animal-we get
jerked out of our path by far more sub-
tle events than agreeing on values.
Sometimes for good, sometimes for ill.
A pause, a glance will do it.
I have noticed that hierarchies are
noticed by those outside them. This sug-
gests that those who make them up are
to some degree ignorant of that fact, or
even that they are projected on a group,
or faction, or gathering, or team, or
committee by someone who perceives
the association as hier-. Or rather,
higher.
Volume 14 1989
Now no one in these stories is dead;
Zimmer, Elias, Ryan, Harwqod or
myself; it would be possible to ask some
direct questions of all of us. For in-
stance, who organized the situation
Zimmer attended? I'll bet Ryan had a
hand in it. Harwood and Ryan are both
movers and shakers in the Canadian
Contact Improv. scene and it seems to
me no Contact scene could exist without
deep bonds existing-I mean people
must enjoy dancing together in order to
have it survive for over a decade. Zim-
mer probably wasn't the only beginner
who wanted to whet their skills on those
two, and probably not the only one to
emotionally defer to their skills.
Elias says there was definitely a sense
of in-group and out-group at the Cur-
rent Exchange gathering [in Vancouver,
B.C., summer 1979]. I can vouch that
there was such a situation. The in-group
photos: Natanja den Boeh
consisted of any one who had a long
association with the idea of CI and had
toured and/or taught with the others.
The out-group were in such a group for
the first time. They were a bit at sea.
They didn't know how to act and since
there are no rules as such, no one told
them. The nice things about rules,
schedules, etc. is that they limit the
number of choices one has to make. If
one may act any old way, a bewilder-
ing situation may exist. Those who
weren't bewildered were in. Those who
were bewildered saw themselves as out.
If Current Exchange was elitist, it was
Volume 14 1989
only in the sense that the entire U.S. and
Canada was not invited. In fact, living
conditions restricted the size. Word was
quietly put out to a few people who told
a few other people. A letter of intent
from participants was required to insure
they had their own reason for using the
facility (Western Front
Lodge/ gallery I studio/ video) and that
their reason resonated with the facility
and harmonized in practical ways with
the rest. Every one of us paid for the
rent of Western Front and pitched in for
food, cooking and cleaning up.
I fear that the article, in using these
two examples, will give elitism a bad
name. Surely just being a small group
or being buddies is not cause to bring
out such a big gun. To be elite is to hold
some plum and restrict its dispersal. To
use this word to criticize those who go
to the trouble of organizing classes or
who attempt to specialize and concen-
trate is to disparage a kind of grass roots
community work.
Zimmer and Elias will be amused to
learn that they have been placed in an
elite, at the top of a hierarchy, recent-
ly. In Berlin at the 4th annual Contact
Conference (they decided to drop the
word 'improvisation', to my despair).
A European delegate asked if all Euro-
peans could do with Contact was repeat
what the first generation had done. So
it goes. Zimmer and Elias are, to
Europe, first generation contactors.
And this is an example of a hierarchy
being perceived from without.
Truth be told, CI is a dance form. It
does have and, as far as I am concern-
ed, teach certain values; mostly to do
with physical safety.
CI has always abounded in logical
contradictions, foremost to do with im-
provisation. If improvisation springs
out of each moment in each individual,
then how to get people to improvise-
to discover their own initiative? And I
point this out in classes-this cannot be
taught, but it can be learned. I can help
with the physical part. I can provide
useful (to me, at least) images and
meditations. I can point out glaring er-
rors in partnering. I can't know how so-
meone feels or protect them from their
insecurity, fear, dislikes, associations,
boredom, or their elation, warmth,
sense of achievement, for that matter.
Contact Improvisation deals with
gravity, momentum, human bodies, etc.
Humans form or perceive hierarchies.
It is egalitarian. The folk who aren't in
Contact Improvisation, either don't
know about it or choose not to do it.
To pick at words just a bit more, Con-
tact Improvisation could not have "em-
braced values of individualism, equali-
ty, and anti-hierarchical relationships,''
because CI cannot do anything. It is
something to be done.
And in Dumont's remark some
strange loose ends, which perhaps
should be brought to the attention of the
U.S. government and of course, its
boss, the people: "If, in effect, the
whole of humanity is deemed present in
each man, then each man should be free
and all men are equal. By contrast, as
soon as a collective end is adopted by
several men, their liberty is limited and
their equality is brought into question."
So apparently even a government
formed on values such as freedom and
equality will trample on freedom and
equality. How embarassing. Yet even
such an experiment in good intentions
is of some interest, compared to the in-
tentions of other governments, then and
now. If liberty and equality are chosen,
then at the moment of choice, they ex-
ist. What happens the next moment is
something for all of us, anthropologists
especially, to ponder. *
STEVE PAXTON is an inveterate Contac-
tor who is interested in improvisation.
CQ/CI Sourcebook 167
The European contact community
came to Berlin for its annual
teachers conference under the banner
"Issues for the Nineties"-but more
of that later.
The merry folk of Europe had come
together, oh joy! There was also in
attendance an extremely large con-
tingent of American gentlefolk, "our
cup floweth over" was the thought
on everyone's mind. Scurrilous ac-
cusations that certain visitors were
treating the event as a trade fair
were roundly dealt with-thank
goodness!
At the first gathering the eager and
the faithful were presented with a
handy information pack and a con-
dom. The completely untrue rumour
that this was in response to previous
years' discussions was treated with
disdain. Instead, the conference
grasped its prophylactics and awaited
"Deepening the Form."
Days and days of dance and inter-
course, the cut and thrust of a
modern art movement, here, in the
very crucible of 20th Century
politics-Berlin. Rich, poor, east,
west, Berlin-the divided city. This is
extremely handy as any fellow tourist
will tell you! What would be an in-
surmountable tourist problem, is
divided into easily touristable
sections.
The East, ever mindful of its respon-
sibilities has erected a handy wall
and effiCient turnstiles, very similar
to the Disneyland model. One always
knows where one is. Everything ap-
pears to be produced by the same
company and everything is so ex-
tremely cheap. So cheap in fact one
has extreme difficulty cashing in all
those cute little chips that allow you
to go on any of the rides.
Sadly however, the West does not
show the same sort of responsibility.
The American, British and French
sectors are almost indistinguishable.
No walls to keep out the non-paying.
No efficient tour guides. I for in-
stance, was completely unable to
find the German sector. A sad fact
of the times, I mused.
''THEY CAME THEY SAW THEY DID
A LITTLE SHOPPING"
Berlin-A personal view by Kevin Finnan
I digress, there had been fears that
there might be a language problem,
but luckily everyone spoke English
and anyone who did not, did not
speak. This compromise was working
wonderfully until a frustrated Ger-
man listener, unable to contain
himself, spoke out somewhat testily
at the first panel discussion. Luckily,
he did so in German. Thus all the
English speakers, completely unable
to understand him, could continue
on without noticing. "Vive la Dif-
ference," whatever that means!
By now the conference was in full
swing. The spartan life of eating,
dancing, eating, dancing, eating talk-
ing, eating, eating was taking its toll.
In the case of yours truly the old
adage "free food makes Jack a fat
boy" was not heeded-alas! Thus
several unsuspecting partners were
crushed to a fraction of their normal
volume when dancing with moi, and
several sackloads of health food.
Allegations of a covert operation by
German dance to elevate its Euro-
pean status by reducing the rest of
us to bulging bean bags were hotly
denied.
At the second panel discussion,
which was on the topic of perfor-
mance, a furor broke out. Members
of the panel were apparently attemp-
ting to perform during the discus-
sion. Order was only restored when
the panel was persuaded to return to
the sedentary you-listen-we-talk for-
mat. It had taken a courageous lone
voice to bring back sanity to the pro-
ceedings. It has long been known
that performance is not a viable
method of communication after all!
I, mercifully, was spared the whole
indignity as I had a pressing engage-
ment with a dinner table in another
part of town.
A quote that rang clearly through
my mind came on the last day. So-
meone, who shall remain nameless,
(after all who am I to point the
finger) but who definitely was not
me, observed dryly that "the con-
ference had been entitled 'Issues for
the Nineties', but as far as anyone
could see it was "Whatever happen-
ed to the Sixties."
168 CQ/CI Sourcebook
I awoke with a start! Which surpris-
ed me as I had been so pleasantly
lulled as to not realise I was un-
conscious. Someone had mentioned
the future-too bad, we were all go-
ing home. Oh well, next year
perhaps?
What had been the questions that
had concerned us? Well, as far as
yours tTuly could recall, they had
been-What is contact? What is
teaching? What is performance?
How can the contact community deal
with itself? Well, pearls indeed! Fun-
damental, I know, but this type of
examination tends to give the same
satisfaction as tap dancing in quick-
sand. For every apparent resolution
there are a dozen new questions.
This is required listening for insom-
niacs but tres yawn for the razor wit-
ted artist of the '80s such as your
good self dear reader. We all agree
"What is contact?" is a nugget, but
so is "What is God?" (There also
seems to be a curious correlation bet-
ween the answers by the way, could
it be ... ) No I digress, still, pressing
on to the next paragraph ...
Attending these conferences is rather
like being engaged in conversation
with someone who is permanently in
the state of just waking up-Who
am I? Where am I? What am I?
repeated endlessly. In the end, driven
by frustration one is moved to say
"I don't know, why don't you tell
me?" or (in the case of those less
charitable than my saintly self)
"Who cares?"
In order to break free from the iner-
tia brought about by these questions,
it is necessary to make the assertion
"I am here and this is where I am
going." This is obvious enough to
those who made it from the first
bleary eye open to boiled egg this
morning, but the conference, I am
afraid to say, still had its head firm-
ly in the pillow!
It seems that the world is such a nas-
ty place these days that anyone who
continues sleeping will get their py-
jamas stolen and wake up with their
bottom showing in public. Questions
such as "What is contact? etc." will
never have completely definitive
answers. If they do I believe the
form will be dead. Therefore it is
necessary for everyone to have their
own "working" answers which they
modify as they proceed along. These
are constantly changing in response
to our own development and the
work we meet.
Volume 14 1989
At the conference I sensed a fear
that people felt their answers might
not be the "right" answers and thus
they needed to compare and discuss
these questions to reconcile the
doubt in their minds.
Firstly, I feel that there are no
"right" answers. Secondly there is
no one to confirm or deny the
"rightness" of your answer. The
thought that someone can do this is
what creates a hierarchy. Finally it is
this sense of doubt which really fires
the work and forces the challenge.
The sense of doubt is to be en-
couraged not feared.
During the conference, many people
stated, almost incredulously, that the
most rewarding part of the con-
ference for them had been the infor-
mal discussions they had been able
to have over lunch etc. They be-
moaned the fact that the organisa-
tion had not offered more facility
within its structure for this to hap-
pen. I feel that this is wanting the
"conference" to do it for you. The
informal discussions are so fruitful
because you yourself have initiated
them. This is to be encouraged.
Looking for ways in which the struc-
ture can make these discussions hap-
pen may be beneficial but I feel
there is a danger in so doing of
returning the responsibility of mak-
ing them happen to the structure,
thus relieving yourself of the burden.
The conference as a whole is to
discussion what oil tankers are to
slalom sailing. "Unwieldy" is me at
my most charitable.
Still, a jolly good time was had by
all and heartfelt thanks must be ex-
tended to Tanzfabrik for the sterling
work done in hosting the event. Well
done everybody!
And so with hearts uplifted and in
the spirit of Perestroika we look for-
ward to 1989 in Finland where, I
suspect, the sheer effort of getting
there will motivate the participants
to get what they want from the con-
ference and perhaps raise our eyes to
the future.
Toodle Pip. u
KEVIN FINNAN is a performer and
teacher living and working in the
Midlands region of England in collabora-
tion with performer/teacher Louise
Richards.
Volume 14 1989
Alex Rounds and Alito Alessi
CQICI Sourcebook 169
0 CQ/CJSou rcebook
Volume 14 1989
BASIC CONTACT LIST--------------
A random list of elements-concepts, exercises, skills and attitudes we thought should be included
in a Basic Contact course. In no particular order, these include:
Alignment
Body-work, massage
The Stand
The spiritual or inner sense of the work
Compassion
Being rather than Doing
Falling
Play, playfulness
Spatial Orientation
Warm-down
Neutral Condition
Entering & leaving the Dance
History of Contact
Breathing
Safety
The Small Dance
Back Stretch
Counterbalances
How to listen to the Body
Ease of movement
Positive feedback modes
Uses of Imagery
Contact Jargon
Kinesiology, Anatomy
Relaxation
Following the Contact Point
Connection
Trust
Posting
Rolling
Balance
Stuffing
Warm-up
Arriving
Ambiguous instructions *
These notes were taken by Jerry Zientara at the After ArtSport Conference, Teaching Discussion,
Minneapolis, MN, June 24, 1980. 0
(cont'd)
Volume 14 1989 CQ/CI Sourcebook 171
STILL MOVING (cont'd)
HARBIN HOT SPRINGS NOTES-----
California Contact Jmprov. Jam
Harbin Hot Springs, Nov. 88
Home, I sit at the breakfast
table, overwhelmed with grief. Leav-
ing Harbin and the incredible sense
of community that we gradually built
was very sad for me. I didn't
acknowledge it until Monday morn-
ing. I was listening to Whales Alive
and the singing back and forth of
the whales made me intensely aware
that our gathering was over and the
migration back to the working
grounds, like whale feeding grounds,
was a very lonely process. Fortunate-
ly, we have a contact community in
San Diego now. Three of us went to
Harbin: Darshana Ellis, Bruce Gard-
ner and myself. So we have each
other as a support group. Two
others are regulars in our communi-
ty: Annete Frei and Laurelia Barton.
We will be processing the learning of
this Harbin for quite awhile. Some
ideas that come up follow.
Mixer: The round robin is ineffi-
cient for giving everyone a chance to
dance. It is common for many of us
to have an inner dialogue that goes
like this: "They look so good," "I
don't want to interrupt," "I'm not
good enough," "I'm tired,
cold ... , " "Neither of them like
me," and "They haven't had a long
enough turn." This kind of taped
message goes through my mind over
and over again. I have to contradict
my mind to get into a round robin.
This becomes less of an issue when I
begin to know I'm accepted. Then
again sometimes the inner messages
are confirmed.
In a mixer format, everyone is en-
couraged to dance with someone
they have never danced with before
for a fixed time interval, then
everyone switches to another un-
familiar dancer. This happens in
"class" settings regularly but I think
it should be used to introduce an
evening of dance. There are no "I'm
interrupting" or "long enough turn"
messages to deal with. And this pro-
cess helps to overcome the "I'm not
good enough" and "I'm cold and
tired" excuses. A set time interval is
very important so that everyone
switches at the same time. Perhaps
the use of a bell or music to cue
people to the switch process is
appropriate. 0
172 CQICI Saurcebook
Volume 14 1989
(cont'd)
There are those who rigidly oppose
structure at all costs. I agree that im-
provisation in its purest form should
dominate. But I have strong feelings
of compassion for the newcomers to
contact who are overwhelmed by the
beauty of the more experienced
dancer and the close bonding and
subgrouping that is common in con-
tact communities.
Nude Dancing: For the first time
at Harbin, we had a nude contact
session that occurred spontaneously
on Friday night. I was overwhelmed
by inner dialogue, "How will my
body react to even greater sensuality
than the already incredibly sensuous
contact dance form?" The beauty of
this session finally overcame my in-
hibitions and I truly enjoyed the
freedom. It was like the first skinny
dipping at the beach. Although I'm
thankful for this experience, I have
mixed feelings: (1) what will out-
siders think, (2) will the wrong kind
of people be attracted to our com-
munity if nude dancing becomes
commonplace, (3) many community
members stopped dancing when the
nude dancing began, (4) many people
were subtly criticized for objecting.
Some thoughts for future occur-
rences: (1) I will not encourage nude
dancing at Harbin with any regulari-
ty, (2) if the community agrees to a
nude dance, I will strongly encourage
a non-prime time, contained setting
that will not disrupt the community
function, (3) this should never be
advertised in any way because of the
potential disruption from outsiders.
Notes on my nude dance ex-
perience: It was like velcro and silk.
Initially I felt glued to my partner
like velcro. This permits some
unusual perches and unexpected
locks. Then the perspiration set in
and I slide around like sliding the
length of the high school shower on
my butt. It wasn't that bad but I
never knew when I would stick or
slip. I perspire heavily so I became
concerned over others slipping on my
slicks so I stopped, but not before
rocking back on my back for a long
slide across the floor. My dances
with men were shorter than usual
and I had some inner reservations
like those I went through when I
first started dancing with my com-
munity brothers long ago.
Renewal (Welcoming) Ceremony:
Initially getting together for the first
community meeting needs more
grounding spiritually. We seem to
get too cerebral with names. I would
appreciate repeating some of the
closing rituals from the last Harbin
so that we can honor the continuity
of the community and show
newcomers some of the results of the
last community gathering. When the
Native Americans joined for the Sun
Dance, they began with ceremonies
that evolved in the course of cen-
turies to honor the community and
to ritually bond each tribe member. I
don't think this needs to be anything
elaborate but something like a line
-
Volume 14 1989
CQ/CI Sourcebook 173
CONT ACT CLASS TITLES AND
DESCRIPTIONS from flyers I picked up
outside the Saturday Berkeley Jam on
April 15, 1989. [N.S.S.]
THE WINNING CIRCLE (Martin
Keogh).
For those with contact experience. We
will start with the fundamentals of Con-
tact, encouraging poise at the center of
it all. The second month, we will surprise
ourselves in flight and extended follow-
through. The third month will be in the
worlds of paradox and talks with the in-
ner dictator who always demands
resolution.
THE FL YING WORKSHOP (Martin
Keogh).
For those with well developed landing
gear. This workshop is the weekend
following the Bay Area Contact Festival.
During this day-long intensive we will
work on finding rhe openings for aerial
play. We willforns on what the dance of-
fers us rather rhan "tricks." We will work
on support, lightness, S(~fiening in the air
and relinquishing extra psychic weight.
CONTACT IMPROVISATION/The In-
stinctual Dance (Carol Swann).
The primary de1·elopmental patterns of
rolling, crawling, falling, walking and
, running form the basis of a movement
vocabulary. Through a detailed and in-
depth forns on these patterns we will
develop an understanding of the body's
structure and the movement offorces act-
ing upon this structure. These principles
will help us to gradually include explora-
tions into the mm·ement form of Contact
Improvisation which is primarily a duet
form. Dancers, sustaining a physical rela-
tionship, move in and out of contact,
uniting their masses to create a mutually
supportive and dynamic interplay of
weight. IYe do not strfre to achieve results
but rather to participate openly in a con-
stantly changing physical reality. Open to
all with or without mm•ement experience!
I look forward to hm·ing a fully physical
and exploratfre time with you!
174 CQKJ Sourcebook
where each community member
touches every other community
member is appropriate. (See the
Closing Ritual.)
Closing Ritual: We closed this
Harbin Jam with a Sufi chant, the
Thunder dance, and a line hug. The
Sufi chant was:
I open my eyes to you,
I open my heart to you,
Together we raise our arms
to the sun.
And together we are opening
our loving hearts as one.
The Thunder dance begins with one
person rubbing their hands together.
Then the hand rubbing progresses
around the circle until it reaches the
first hand rubber again, then hand
clapping begins and progresses
around the circle, then knee slapping
and foot stomping. Then the steps
are reversed: knee slapping, clapping,
rubbing, then silence.
Lastly we passed each community
member through a double line,
showering them with hugs, kisses,
rubs, lifts. As wonderful as this was,
it took too long with a fifty person
tribe. At Naropa Institute last sum-
mer I solved the problem in my own
way by writing a personal message to
each one of our 35 member class and
a poem for the three teachers; this
took me 3 hours but that was a
meager expression of the compassion
I felt for our Naropa Dance
Community.
With the help of Bruce Gardner, a
San Diego contacter, on the plane
back to San Diego from Harbin, we
came up with the collapsed circle
dance. It begins with a circle. Each
participant hugs the person to the
left with only their left arm, leaving
the right arm free. Then collapse the
circle inward so that it is more like a
long hollow worm. As the collapsed
circle cycles around, each tribal
member greets every other member
by touching them with their free
hand. It ends up being a community
contact dance where the physical and
spiritual integrity of the community
takes on an actual form as opposed
to an amorphous soup.
DE
A H
B G
CF
ADEH "'\.
\..._BC F_G
WII,DNESS AND GRACE/Creative
Movement and Contact Improvisation
(Kirk Andrews).
Each Class begins with a welcoming ritual
and warm-up to unify and ground our
energies. We start with "traditional" solo
and duet skills and then expand into
"non-traditional" creative expression,
using the emotional tone and potential of
the group to guide the movement process.
This may lead us imo emotional qualities
ranging from active and joyous all !he
way to depressed and passive. We will use
mulliple channels of sensory perception
10 fill 0111 and enrich the dancing. Our
goal is to dance with the Gods and God-
desses, and maybe even a litrle bir with
the devil. This is more than jusl a dance
class. Bring your dreams and your
judgments, your wildness and your car-
ing, your sensi!ivity and your impulses.
Movement experience and 1111 ounce of
courage required.
A PEER COUNSELING CLASS for the
CONT ACT COMMUNITY (Tim Hart-
nett and Karen Gee).
This will be a special class offered to the
Contact Improvisation Dance community
(dancers and friends of dancers). We will
be teaching the theory and techniques we
have learned from our study and practice
of Co-counseling. In addition, we will in-
tegrate body-oriented therapeutic work
drawn from other sources. Our purpose
is to help you become skilled at
facilitating yourself and others through
the healing of emotional pain. The
material covered in this class can be use'1
for your personal benefit or integrated
into your own work as a healing artist.
Each meeting there will be discussion of
counseling theory, demonstration of
technique, and time to give and receive
attention with each other. Class members
will meet in pairs to practice the techniqes
outside of class once per week (we will
help you arrange this). We hope to draw
on what Contact Improvisation has to
teach about trust and support, add aver-
bal component, and create an environ-
ment for profound emotional release.
You are welcome to join us.
Volume 14 1989
(cont'd)
After considering the complexity of a
tribal connection, I realized why the
number of people we dance with·
seems so limited. To dance for 5
minutes with everyone in a 50
member tribe would take an organiz-
ed 4 hours. I think we can touch
every member of our tribe but the
dance time is inherently limited.
Although I have appreciation for the
difficulty, that will not stop me from
enjoying the challenge.
Track-to-Closure Witnesses: Each
community gathering needs someone
to sense the closure of a process. On
our nude dancing discussion and
subsequent dancing, we did not have
closure. At our final meeting, the
tribal memory led us gently back to
that sore spot and we brought it
closer to completion. Our witnesses
helped us all; we can all use our in-
ner witness to the benefit of the tribe
as well as ourselves.
Co-Counselling: This is relatively
new to me but I sense great value
for some of us in this process. I saw
groups get together to co-counsel;
defined for me as active listening and
closure assistance. All members
would listen to one member for a
focused time interval until that
member reached closure on their
process. Another part of this is
assisting with continuity or tracking;
the speaker being gently counselled
to stay on track.
Kinesthetic/Touching: Another
need I see in the community is for
safe touching. Many, many
subgroupings form at Harbin for
stroking and petting and purring.
This could use some organized en-
couragement for newcomers.
Oldtimers are like old cats rubbing
against each other's legs, backs,
heads, etc. Like co-counseling, touch
group networking for newcomers
could be helpful.
Masks: I realized at this Harbin
Jam that I wear a mask that
unknown to me may put people off.
I work in a factory where there are
plenty of robots. And I think I may
be reflecting the mindless gaze that I
frequently get at work. I will be
playing with my personal masks and
artificial masks so that my face
becomes more open and joyous. I
saw this in myself after seeing it in
some Harbin folk. I will be looking
as carefully in the mirror as I look
at some of my friends. *
BARRY HYNUM is a contactor from San
Diego, California.
Volume 1 4 1989
CONTACT: PRACTICE and PRO-
CESS/ An Advanced Training Group
(Alan Ptashek).
Contact Improvisation engages our fullest
attention to our bodies, minds and emo-
tions. Time, discipline, humour and trust
in ourselves and one another is the pro-
cess and the practice that strengthens our
dance. Contact Improvisation has been
an integral part of my personal and pro-
fessional work for fifteen years. As
teacher and group facilitator, I am offer-
ing this advanced training group for com-
mitted practitioners of Contact Im-
provisation who are interested in a group
process structure where we can deepen
our practice in ways that are specific and
meaningful to how we are moving, think-
ing and feeling.
We will strengthen our physical and in-
teractive skills, finding greater confidence
and risk-taking abilities in our dancing.
We will look at and challenge our belief
systems about Contact Improvisation and
ourselves, as well as how we develop and
perpetuate those beliefs. Other areas that
we will explore include: control and loss
of control, intimacy and distance,
vulnerability and power, gender issues,
sexuality and sensuality, conflict and
resolution. This is an opportunity to prac-
tice Contact Improvisation in an in-depth
and contained environment where extend-
ed dancing, personal feedback and discus-
sion will form a rich meeting place for
men and w·omen.
My intention is to create an on-going
group training with a committed core of
participants. A minimum 2 month com-
mittment is required.
CONT A CT IM PRO VISA TION /The In-
stinctual Dance (Sue Stuarl).
Through rolling, crawling, walking, run-
ning and jumping we will explore the
physics of body weight, gravity, and
momentum. Reconnecting to these early
infant movement patterns can help wake
up animal instincts lost or forgotten. Sen-
sitising to internal movement will
establish a grounding from which we
move into contact with one another. We
will make the initial connection slowly
through partner warm-ups such as shared
stretching and massage, opening our
senses more deeply to both our own and
our partners movement and rhythms. We
will practise ways to lift, fall, jump, and
pick each other up, taking the dance in-
to the air. In this enlivened state, dancers
play with moving in and out of contact
exploring ways of supporting each other.
Some of the classes will be taught by
visiting contact improv. teachers from the
Bay Area.
~
i ...
w
CQICI Sourcebook 175
THE BERLIN CONTACT CONFERENCE 1988
a report by Juliet Shelley (excerpted)
About eighty five people came from
Europe and the U.S. to take part in the
Fourth European Contact Teachers Con-
ference in Berlin, W. Germany from June
8-13, 1988.
About a year ago, the Tanzfabrik (literal-
ly, "Dance Factory") was asked to par-
ticipate in "Werkstatt Tanz: Issues for the
Nineties" as Berlin is the European City of
Culture for 1988. DIETER HEITKAMP,
BRUNO STEFANONI and BOB REASE col-
lectively organized this conference with a
theme of 'New Influences and Crossovers'.
"Werkstatt Tanz: Issues for the Nineties"
was organized around a theme of artistic ex-
change and some of the events of the con-
ference were open to the public.
June 8th and 9th were days for registration
and open dancing as well as reunions with
friends, and acquainting oneself with parts
of Berlin. Most people had arrived by the
evening of Thursday 9th for an official
welcoming and introductions at the new
studio at Tanzfabrik. One studio had been
put aside as a 'Video Cafe' and quiet room
where, throughout the conference, videos
of contact-related work were being shown
informally.
Friday 10th June began with OPEN JAMS
in three studios at the Tanzfabrik. On Friday
afternoon, NANCY STARK SMITH and
ROBIN FELD led two separate
WORKSHOPS-"Developing the Form"
and "Contact and Martial Dance."
On Saturday afternoon, ISHMAEL
HOUSTON-JONES led a workshop on the
Politics of dancing, while PAULINE DE
GROOT led one on improvised dance and
music.
On Friday and Saturday evening after din-
ner, there were two PANEL DISCUSSIONS.
The topicfor Friday was 'Teaching' and Nan-
cy Stark Smith moderated, assisted by Steve
Paxton [see excerpts from this discussion in
this Newsletter]. People on the panel includ-
ed ROBIN FELD, BOB REASE, LOUISE
RICHARDS, BRUNO STEFANONI, BERND
KAMMERER, and GILA ROGERS. The
discussion looked at questions in teaching
such as the definition of a teacher, language
and Contact, sexuality and aggression within
sessions, and Contact in Therapy. Bernd
spoke of his difficulties in the translation from
English into German, of the concepts and
practice of Contact. He had learnt Contact
in English and was teaching it in German.
Bernd was voicing an experience of teaching
which must be common to all those teachers
176 CQ,K'I Sourcebook
of Contact for whom English is not their first
spoken language. It was added that it helps
to use language which is part of the lives of
the people being taught, to teach concepts
of Contact in ways which will make it ac-
cessible for them.
Steve Paxton said that his first concern
when teaching Contact was how to teach it
without people hurting themselves. Robin
Feld described how she uses the breath to
encourage the release· and flow of weight in
her teaching. Using imagery such as melting,
softening and folding at the joints all helps
to encourage a safe physical environment for
doing Contact. Louise, who teaches Contact
with Kevin Finnan in high security prisons,
said that changing from a dispersed to a
focussed activity can also prevent injury in
a session.
The question "what are you teaching
when you are teaching Contact?" was link-
ed with finding a definition of a teacher.
STEVE BATTS spoke of sharing an investiga-
tion with his students. He directs but may
not know the outcome of the activity. He
brought up the element of improvising in
teaching, so that possibilities may be ex-
plored by teacher and learner together.
"What about feeling and emotion in Con-
tact?" This brought up some important
issues. Steve Paxton talked about how emo-
tion may or may not be acknowledged in
dance. He spoke of how Contact arose in
a dance context, within which people such
as Martha Graham and Jose Limon were
dealing with emotion, and making it into
form. Paxton was drawn to Merce Cunn-
ingham, because Cunningham's dancing
ethic was more abstract and he dealt with
shape, form, space and time-the physics of
dancing. This was more intellectual and
there was less drama, less expression of emo-
tions. In physics there is gravity, momentum,
shape, angles and as physics is present in
dancing, so are the emotions, "but we don't
know how to deal with it, teach it, make it
into a form." This was difficult for Kevin Fin-
nan who explained that he taught Contact
to criminals who have killed children and
adults, including their relations, and these
'students' learn Contact and talk about it
afterwards. I think there was some confusion
here between finding forms for emotional ex-
pression in daily life, and finding emotional
forms for dance, although the distinction can
sometimes be difficult. Contact in therapy
was an issue which was also discussed, and
Gila Rogers, a dancer who is also a
psychotherapist, explained how she combin-
ed Developmental work with Contact in her
treatment of emotionally disturbed people
and how effective Contact can be in her
work generally.
On the following evening, the topic for the
panel discussion was 'Performing
Contact-Working with Personal Material'.
Steve Paxton moderated, assisted by Nan-
cy Stark Smith. The discussion began with
an infqrmal jam for the panel who were
PAULINE DE GROOT, LAURIE BOOTH,
BOB REASE, DIETER HEITKAMP,
ISHMAEL HOUSTON-JONES, MARK TOM-
PKINS and JAAP KLEVERING. When the
dancing had subsided, some people found
seats to sit on, while others continued im-
provising while the discussion took place.
After about an hour, there was a break and
the panel rearranged their chairs closer to
the audience and remained seated. Steve
began by asking each person on the panel
to say a little about themselves, and their
work. He also asked them whether they had
danced in a Broadway show or musical,
which had run for more than three nights,
or if they had danced on a boat, and whether
they performed set material or improvised
material. I was occupied with taping the
discussion and taking photos so my notes are
scarce. However, I have down that Laurie
Booth was interested in aberrant behaviour
as movement in performance, describing
aberrant as marginalized or unusual activi-
ty. He recounted an incident which he was
witness to at the zoo that morning, where
a monkey had made history by imitating a
film cameraman to the point where the
monkey was making a film of everybody
looking at him inside his cage. (I think this
is what he meant, although the cameraman
may have given the monkey the equipment
to make a film). Ishmael had never danced
any set material, and Steve was alone in dan-
c~ng in a sh~w which repeated itself for many
nights running.
JORGEN TELLER asked whether im-
provisation can become a collection of anec-
dotes from learned forms. Steve replied, "Be
careful of what you're taught, every step
you've ever learned is stored in the body,
and pieces will emerge when you're least exJ
pecting it." There was a lot of discussion
around defining the form of Contact Im-
provisation. A definitive statement of Steve's:
"Forms exist to follow, but you're less than
human if you don't try to break them." This
panel discussion began at 8pm and was go-
ing strong at 11 :30pm when I left. There
were tapes made of it which would hopefully
be obtainable at the Tanzfabrik.
The NETWORKING COMMUNITY
MEETING began at lOam on Sunday mor-
ning, with sunshine streaming through the
window of the studio. We decided that the
next European Contact Teacher's Con-
ference would take place from the 10th-17th
August 1989 in Finland, and Jaap Klevering
and Jaana Turunen would be organizing it.
Volume 14 1989
in Cyprus and Walter Weiler offered to
organize one for Zurich, Switzerland.
Dieter Heitkamp was interested in com-
piling a kind of journal to document
responses to and feelings about the con-
ference in Berlin. In the last part of the
meeting we all shared something of this with
the rest of the group. Here are some of the
things that were said:
How to begin dancing with strangers.
Was this a conference or a symposium.
The founders of Contact dance don't know
the definition of it.
The conference was part of Issues for the
Nineties and we spent most of the time
talking about the '60s and '70s.
At no time did anyone say OK that's what
Contact is.
To make a group at this conference to talk
about personal, social and political issues
surrounding Contact dancing.
That a large group of people should learn
how to listen to each other.
It is a political act to go and see how the
Berliners live instead of attending the
conference-this is as important as be-
ing 'in the stars'.
There is no personal communication after
such intimacy.
To create more opportunities for personal
work to develop.
The psychology of the outsider-a
celebration.
To sustain a network between conferences.
Wanting to have nothing to do with the 'hip-
py, pseudo cult' which Contact could
become and to keep Contact available
for all people.
The "BERLIN JAM" on Sunday afternoon
was an opportunity for open dancing among
people outside of the conference and those
in it, and new energy and faces meant reviv-
ed dancing, for me anyway. It was a
welcome change from the highly structured
events of the conference, and reminded me
of the two days open jamming before the
conference began. I enjoyed the Sunday
afternoon novelty of that jam and was glad
of the opportunity to dance with new
people.
That night was the party, and Dieter
transformed the biggest studio with some
spotlights and a sound system into a disco.
On Monday morning a group of us went
to a cafe together. At the Contact Network-
ing meeting Mark Tompkins suggested that
people get together and talk about the per-
sonal, social and political issues that they ex-
perienced in dance and particularly Contact
dance. It was a small group and there was
the chance to talk quite personally which
was a relief. The group was small enough for
some close personal communication to take
place and I feel that this is what the con-
ference, by virtue of its size, failed to pro-
vide for, except in this group and outside of
the structured ti me.
The PERFORMANCE MARATHON was
from 1 pm to 6pm that afternoon. This event
was open to the public and everyone paid
15 marks toward it for the Berliner Aids Hilfe.
In the first half there were solos, duets and
one or two group pieces. This half was quite
organized, in that there was a predetermin-
ed order to the pieces. There were im-
provisations and set pieces in this part of the
marathon, including new collaborations.
After the break, the space was basically open
except there was a structure which Pauline
Volume 14 1989
ignored or forgotten as time w;nt by.
When one of the musicians left, sound
became the domain of the dancers who ac-
companied themselves from around the
space or within it, talking and singing, or us-
ing tapes or playing the percussion in-
struments that were available. The space was
nearly always pretty well full of activity and
there were one or two solos and at one point
there were about twenty people in the
space.
The marathon was the last organized event
of the conference, although most people
would be attending the PERFORMANCES of
STEVE PAXTON and LISA NELSON, and
LAURIE BOOTH that evening in another
part of Berlin. But it was the end of the con-
ference at the Tanzfabrik and so those of us
who were there sat in a circle together for
two minutes of silence to acknowledge an
ending with Dieter, Bob and Bruno.
I would like to finish with some quotes by
KERIAC from an article called "Politics and
Contact" in an old issue of CQ:
. whv was this form named Contact Im-
provisation and not Steve Paxton Technique?
In the entire modem dance world, every new
approach except Contact is based on a cult
of personality: Graham technique, Cun-
ningham technique, Hawkins technique,
etc . .. to me, that name is revolutionary-it
reflects a whole new value system in
dance. . I understand that Paxton was a
teacher at Bennington at the time he began
exploring Contact, and that his co-workers
were mostly students. And yet, if two peo-
ple try to do Contact while maintaining the
typical student-teacher relationship, I think
those two wouldn't end up doing much Con-
tact at all. Both the name and the form itself
assume that Contact is a collective creation
that is bigger than individuals. There is a let-
ting go of ego, and a letting go of traditional
role expectations, that is unprecedented in
dance.
.. Contact began with the progressive, anti-
elitist values of its inventors. But third and
fourth generation contacters, who may have
little or no contact with the originators, now
outnumber the originators as teachers of the
form. It's quite possible to teach someone
'Contact' in the physical dimension only,
without any conscious reference to values,
or even in relation to values that conflict with
the form. To me, it's important for teachers
of Contact to cultivate in themselves and in
their students a heightened awareness of the
political and spiritual richness of this form of
dance.
.. I think we in the Contact community
have a unique opportunity to foster the
revolutionary model that was generated by
the Contact originators. We can validate the
activities that do not conform to the tradi-
tional expectations, because our own ex-
perience in Contact has given us intimations
of another type of 'good quality perfor-
mance' . .. we can perceive performers as real
people in real time, making choices that have
physical results neither good nor bad, rather
than applauding 'stars' whose image would
be ruined by a 'mistake'."
[from "Politics and Contact," interview with
Keriac by Mark Pritchard, San Francisco
1979, CQ Vol. Vil no. 7. Fall 7987.]
JULIET SHELLEY lives and works in Oxford,
England and is a member of Jointwork Dance
Group.
CQICI Sourcebook 177
-
" .....
~
z.
178 CQ;CI Sourcebook Volume 19 1994
TEACHING CONTACT
IMPROVISATION
-An abstract of the panel-discussion with
Nancy Stark Smith, Robin Feld, Bernd Kam-
merer, Steve Paxton, Bob Rease, Louise
Richards, Gila Rogers and Bruno Stefanoni
(excerpts)
At the Contact Teachers Conference in
Bedin, June 1988, the first public evening
was a discussion about Teaching. I tried to
put the four hours of tape recorded discus-
sion into a "short form," which is quite a
subjective selection and not always in the
original turn, so I hope I didn't distort too
much of what people were saying.
With this abstract I want to say thank you
that I could join the conference and get a
feeling of what the community is. This was
a "big thing" for me with a lot of highlights,
fears and new contacts, because I didn't
have so much experience in Cl and dance
at all. It helped me a lot in writing my thesis
of Cl for my exams in physical education.
[Ulla Brinkmann]
SAFETY
STEVE: When I realized how many people
get hurt in their own kitchen, I thought Cl
is very safe. But it was that preoccupation
with safety that made me try to find some way
to make it teachable. Was there a wav in
which safety could be taught in what looks
like a very dangerous situation?
GILA: I feel I can't take the responsibility that
people don't hurt themselves. I only see what
kind of people do I have, how much trust do
they have in their own body. So, if I see that
they are scared with their body, I work a lot
with the floor and the surface of the body,
so that they start to develop the feeling that
they can trust their own body and that there
is always the floor. It doesn't matter, whether
it is a physical or an emotional situation, but
that every cell of the body starts to learn there
is support for me.
BOB: In terms of individual movement, it's
not ordinary in our daily life to use our hands
for support on the ground. It is a very rich
experience for people when they learn how
to break their fall with their hands. So there
are certain skills and safeties to learn at the
same time [as having] a really moving
experience.
ROBIN: For me, developing a released body
is to have a very responsive body, that
responds quickly to the different situations,
whether you go up or down. The floor is also
a big answer for me. I guess first going inside,
working with gravity and working with the
connection to sensation, the sensation of
weight, the sensation of releasing that weight
into the floor. Also, the bones seem to me
important, a kind of folding and unfolding
of the joints so that the weight can draw in-
to the center and then spill out of it.
BERND: You also have to develop a reaction
or a kind of awareness in speed.
BOB: There is also a commitment to merg-
ing with the partner. This is something that
I couldn't have learned alone. There is an
underlying trust, commitment to each other
as human beings. Even if you don't like
somebody you are dancing with, even if you
hated him on that night. you still have this
underlying commitment to get out oi that
stuff and commit yourself to the task at hand.
Volume 1 4 1989
EMOTIONS
NANCY: Let's go on to emotions in
teaching. I think there is an attitude about
teaching Cl and doing Contact, that there
is a kind of "mask of neutrality" that goes
with it. Steve, in the way you've worked
and taught, it seems that as emotions arise,
you don't get involved, you let it go, you
don't work with that. What would you say
about working with the emotional energy
that arises in dancing?
STEVE: The first problem was the context in
which Contact arose. It arose in a dance con-
text in the States in the modern dance styles.
Most of them were quite dramatically emo-
tional, or a romantic style . .. except for Cun-
ningham, really the most important abstract
style, and that was what I was drawn to. He
wasn't dealing with the emotions. He was
almost looking at a kind of physics of dance
and to get to that in a pure way, the way
couldn't be dramatized. He says that we are
human beings and we have emotions, ... but
we are not expressing and we're not
dramatizing it.
In Contact, the other stuff occurs. This
could be like and dislike, hate and love and
sexuality and all that. So there is a kind of foot-
note underneath all the physics. I don't know
how to teach it or make it into a form or
enclose it in the art, except working personal-
ly with the people. But the physical reality
is like a water for the fish. We all have it and
we most of the time ignore it. For me it is
always the time of looking at that and finding
more and more about it and how are things
connected. But so far physical reality seems
to be quite a rich entity in teaching.
ROBIN: For me it seems that people in their
dancing now recognize a moment, a feeling,
and it is almost like a sidetrip, like a play with
that moment and then going back into the
physical. It is just a perception I had in my
own dancing, it is maybe like a tender mo-
ment with someone, as an example. And that
you not only feel it, but you might exaggerate
it, the feeling, for the moment, like show it.
Let it come out.
STEVE: If you find yourself in Contact sud-
denly pushing and fighting as a joke, then
there is aggression in it. I had someone who
said, don't be aggressive, only be loving, but
I didn't want to do that. We couldn't find
that form unless we got rid of social
uneasiness. So what do I do instead of say-
ing don't be aggressive, I try to say "isn't
momentum interesting?"
GILA: One word which I use a lot is "emo-
tional body." It is not about emotions in the
dance, because the people I work with are
not dancers and they don't live with their
body and their emotions. So my approach to
Cl is to give them a laboratory where they
can make the experiences that I am at home
in my body and that I don't have only a
mechanical body. I don't need to evaluate
whether an emotion is good or bad, strong
or not strong enough. And I can give them
a lot of possibilities from Contact to ex-
perience it. Like in walking and feeling the
difference when somebody gives me support
just by putting their hand on my back and
then walking alone again finding my own
way. And in this very simple movement there
is so much experience to feel my emotional
body. When I own it, I'm responsible for it.
DANNY LEPKOFF: For me personally, the
best dances I had rode on not physics, they
rode on connections which had to do with
trust or feelings of aggression, connection or
love. This gave me the energy to dance. But
this was only in my mind . .. But I didn't feel
that this was taught at all and the whole ex-
perience for me was opening to come into
connection with people and share.
BERND: To use emotions for skill, for exam-
ple: this problem of closeness, this problem
of touching the sexual area. I use it sometimes
in a very funny way like "bump-dance," and
people giggle and they have fun and after-
wards they notice this thing (pelvis) moves
much more than they thought. For me, it is
a preparation for a lift to warm up the pelvis,
because before they don't have an idea how
to get them round, how to get them under
the pelvis of the partner. And this I need for
a pure physical dance.
PIERRE SERAPHIN: I'd like to speak about
an issue of technique. I think that at the same
time a teacher creates his technique, they
must create their "anti-technique." At the
same time a certain kind of knowledge is in-
troduced, the idea you have to give what you
cannot know. -tr
CQICI Sourcebook 179
DIALOGUES AND
EXPLORATIONS
The following is excerpted
from "The Alphabet ofMovement:
Primitive Reflexes, Righting Reactions
and Equilibrium Responses/Part I",
by Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen,
with interviews by Nancy Stark Smith.
Spontaneous Stepping.
180 CQ/CT Sourcebook Volwne 14 1989
Volume 14 1989
n:.
I~
.... . ,
pe9P~
U.tfo1v.
·s.th~te
:~~(j~e~6avet .. 1"1~~:.··.··
... .. iisay, or eµlotional ~I>res.'f •···
·~fil\t:Ji~ moy~Jtient\• · ·. · · ·· · ·· ·
CQICI Sourcebook 181
'--<
Ill
::i
'--<
i::
f4 i;;·
s·
-A
e.
.....
::i
"' >
::i ::i
s
"' F-
"' z s::
....
t Ill
'<
c.. 00
>. ·"°
..c 0
0 "'
0 ::i
...c: < "'
c.. !"'
a bottle of wine, a cane, a cloth
by Martin Keogh
In the ancient fairy tales there is often a character walking in the woods where he meets a man (often named
Mercurius, one of the names of Hermes) who gives three gifts. These might include a bottle of wine that is never
empty, or a cane that will open any door, or a cloth that will heal any illness. A gift that is often given is the cloak
of invisibility. One of the images I often wear as I'm dancing is this cloak. I try not to interpret the image or figure
out how it applies to my dance, I simply wear it, and the dance changes.
In teaching Contact Improvisation, I have found images to be invaluable for getting at the soul of our dance.
It is possible to give physical corrections and teach techniques but I have found that it is the imagery that brings
down mountains and sets the oceans ablaze. The images are sometimes descriptive and sometimes prescriptive.
I will often flesh them out with a story or other images but they don't come with an explanation. Here is a list
of images, some that I have used in my own dancing and some that I have given in my classes:
- sleeping beauty after the kiss
- the sand in an hourglass
- sausages for bones
- an empty scale
- seeing through fish eyes
-Atlas after putting down the world
- think of yourself as a timeless piece of literature
-hunter after big game deep in the jungle and the lions
have just come into view
- bread rising and overflowing the bowl
- resplendent robes, jewels and crown of a king
- at the bottom of the exhale is when the lights go on
- pancake batter spreading as it's poured
- patina cracking and peeling off
- greenhouse for winter blossoms in the chest
- head and shoulders like a mop
-you have no forehead
- an old crone who has seen it all
- the reverence, standing in a grand cathedral with
sunlight streaming in
- flowing skirt, longgggg hair, dangling earrings, dozen
bracelets, emerald in bellybutton, tattoo of a rose on
the thigh
- filled with cooking garbanzo beans
- surprising thunder claps in the head
- set up house at the bottom of the exhale
- the view at the top of the inhale
- spaghetti as it's dropped into boiling water
-you have no arms or legs
- jellyfish in the joints
-the fall of the Roman Empire
- tumbleweed
- your spine is a pollywog (tadpole)
- your ribs are fingers
- pads of butter between each vertebra
- bird bones that are lighter than feathers
- a lover hand feeding you
- granite mountain with crags and ledges and trees
growing from rock
- a leaf in the wind
- mane of a lion whipping in the wind D
182 CQICI Saurcebook
Volume 14 1989
25 Questions on
Improvisation
gathered from teachers and students
during the Summer Dance Course "On Improvisation,"
June 1985 at the Theaterschool Modern Dance Department,
Amsterdam, Netherlands
1. Is improvisation one thing or is it many different things?
2. Imagination and structure, where are we free?
3. How does imagination relate to form?
4. Is improvisation in dance only the lack of set material?
5. How can you use feedback (video, audio, discussion) in working on
improvisation?
6. Is improvisation a technique?
7. Do animals improvise?
8. How do you develop skill in improvisation?
9. How does improvisation apply to physical training? to body work? to
technique?
10. How does the activity of research relate to the performance situation or
can we continue the sensibility of research in performance?
11. What does limitation, structure and rule do to improvisation?
12. What do we want the audience to know about improvisation?
13. How do you relate to the audience while improvising?
14. Creative process and improvisation. The same thing?
15. What are the perceptual skills of improvisation?
16. What are criteria for evaluating improvisation?
17. Can the same standards be used to evaluate the success of an improvised
performance as are used to evaluate a performance of set movement?
18. Is improvisation a political choice?
19. Are there specific skills, either physical or creative, that facilitate the learn-
ing of improvisation?
20. What do you do as a teacher of improvisation, if your students understand
the assignment in a way it is not meant?
21. How can there be such a difference between the experience of doing an
improvisation and the seeing of an improvisation from the outside?
22. Is improvisation anarchism?
23. What is the relation between improvising and life?
24. Is a cathedral built over a period of 200 years of improvisation?
25. How do you know the ending of an improvisation? *
Volume 14 1989
CQ/CI Sourcebook 183
A DEFINITION
The natural forces that govern the movements of the human body
on the earth are the same for all bodies. External forces-gravity,
momentum, friction, centrifugal, centripetal. Internal forces-
breath, bones, muscle condition, tension level, habit patterns.
Environmental conditions-floor, weather, size of space, time of
day, time allotment. The play of these forces together are THE
SCORE. Testing the limits and the range is the challenge. When
two bodies, moving with this score JOIN FORCES, the variations are
endless. The combinations test the flexibility, imagination, courage
and intelligence of the bodies involved in the play.
photo: Doug Winter
184 CQ/CI Sourcebook Volume4 1978-79
Some Considerations When
Structuring an Improvisation
(to be seen by an audience)
by Jaime Stover
'" What sort of structure do I want in terms of spatial rhythm?
" Do I want to create a mechanistic Newtonian framework, sitting over the
dance like a compressional structure, OR
... do I want a relative structure which reflects changes which have occur-
red as part of the unraveling of the dance in time and space?
" Is my intention in providing this structure: to give a formal framework which
allows the viewer to better see the action taking place, to set up a program
of interrelated parts and then observe the phenomenon which occurs, to
couch dramatic, virtuoso, or other purposely expressive elements (no mat-
ter what the aesthetic), or possibly to create a movement event with no par-
ticular purpose?
" Do I want visual markers that act as stabilizing markers which arrest the flow
of actions and space?
" Do I want my 'game rules' to be clearly seen, only indicated, or deeply
hidden?
" How much do I want to rely on the actual rules I set or on the formalistic
and otherwise significant sensibilities of the dancers?
" How does my dance fulfill or not fu Ifill existing contextual aesthetic expec-
tations and parameters for dance, for performance, for improvisation,
for ... art? *
On these remote pages it is writ-
ten that animals are divided into
(a) those that belong to the
Emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c)
those that are trained, id) suck-
ling pigs, (e) mermaids, (f)
fabulous ones, lg) stray dogs, (h)
those that are included in this
classification, (i) those that trem-
ble as if thev were mad, (j) in-
numerable ones, (k) those drawn
with a very fine camel's hair
brush, (/) others, (m) those that
have just broken a flower vase,
(n) those that resemble flies from
a distance.
-Jorge Luis Borges
Volume 1 4 1989
CQ/CI Sourcebook 185
Melanie Hedlund photo: Erich Franz
186 CQICI Sourcebook
Final Notes on
Improvisation
by Nathalie Rousse
written for Improvisation en Danse, a course given by
Dena Davida at the University of Quebec. Translated
from the French by Dena.
(A conversation with myself.)
Do you like to improvise?
Sometimes yes and sometimes no.
Why not?
Because I'm afraid that my body lacks ideas.
Why yes?
Because when the improvisation is over I discover that I've
enjoyed it and learned something as well. Improvising for me
is like eyeglasses for someone who doesn't see clearly.
Why are you afraid that your body lacks ideas?
What I mean to say is that when the improv begins, I do have
ideas, but feel too timid or incapable of carrying them
through; and that is why now I try to move not from
preconceived ideas, but rather in function of the present mo-
ment and the things around me.
What things?
First of all, the space-also, the other movers and objects.
While improvising, what do you find most stimulating?
I am rarely stimulated from the inside (maybe later on).
Specific places motivate me enormously, certain pieces of
music, occasionally themes and images, and also other
people. Maybe it's because I'm new to improvisation that I
need outside stimulation. I sometimes feel insecure because
I'm concerned with the quality of the final product, and with
improvisation you never know. On the other hand, I've
discovered how process can be as interesting as the final
product and is not necessarily complex. I've always had the
impression that discovery comes only by digging long and
deeply but, for now, I need first to look for those things close
to the surface and near to me. *
Volume 14 1989
Volume 15
1990
Amie Dowling and Catherine Sands in rehearsal. Washington, D.C., 1987.
MAKING SAFE CONTACT
by Diane Elliot
I have a recurring dream that I
am teaching dance to a large group
of students who aren't interested and
keep leaving the room until only one
or two remain. In the dream, I feel
confident and strong about my
material but am struggling to com-
mand people's attention. Different
characters people this dream, both as
students and observers. Sometimes
my former dance teachers from New
York, Murray Louis or Phyllis
Lamhut, appear and criticize me.
One time my mother was one of the
two students who remained at the
end of the class. Sometimes I feel
bad about everyone having left,
sometimes relieved. The last time I
had the dream, I knew that the peo-
ple who stayed really wanted to be
there.
Recently I lived out this dream.
During the winter I taught a Sunday
morning series called "Making Con-
tact," open to new and experienced
contacters. In the class flyer I
described Contact Improvisation as a
movement form integrating
"elements of dance, play, martial
arts and developmental movement in
a concrete way that allows us to
celebrate moving and to explore both
our individuality and our in-
terdependence with other people and
our environment." During the past
two years I have incorporated into
my Contact classes my growing
understanding of developmental
movement patterns and the interrela-
tionship of body systems, cognitive
information and deeply felt
knowledge gained through my study
of Body-Mind Centering•m. With
each new level of discovery in my
Volume 15 1990
CQ/CI Sourcebook 187
own learning process, I amend my
class descriptions, wanting to attract
people whose personal discovery pro-
cess will mesh with and expand upon
my own.
Last winter's series began with
about 12 people, some with a fair
amount of Contact experience, some
trained dancers with minimal Con-
tact experience, and some without
any Contact background at all. The
first-timers were scared and said so
in our first check-in circle. They
weren't quite sure why they were
there, what would be asked of them.
The only man in the group, a novice
contacter, worried about being the
only man. Others wanted to be more
present in their bodies, but were
daunted by their sense of vulnerabili-
ty in the group or their fear of in-
timacy in working with a partner.
Some people could only sign up for
part of the series, a situation I un-
comfortably allowed because I felt it
was the only way to fill the class.
Nevertheless, the first class went
well. People candidly verbalized their
excitement as well as their discom-
fort. We worked deeply and gently
on cellular awareness, yielding into
the floor and through a partner to
the floor. We practiced thrusting in-
to the resistance provided by a part-
ner's body. By the end of the class,
people seemed satisfied and expand-
ed, more confident about their abili-
ty to take care of themselves and to
learn in this environment. I relaxed
about the class, feeling that the
group's energies would mix well and
that the more experienced would
both encourage and learn from the
beginners.
One woman never came back. On
the phone she told me that the class
was too scary for her. Over the
weeks more people came and went.
Never knowing exactly who or how
many would show up, I felt bullied
by the inconsistency. I wanted to be
open to the energy at hand, but was
subtly angry that I couldn't count on
people at the very least to be there. I
felt unmet, frustrated that I couldn't
generate momentum by building on
previously taught skills. It was like
teaching a perpetual first class.
By the last class of the series only
six people remained. And during that
class, even the few remaining people,
one by one, began to leave. Someone
slipped out of a group improv in
188 CQ;Cl Sourcebook
which people had the options to
move, watch or draw. When I went
to tell her good-by, she "playfully"
punched me in the stomach, saying
she had left a drawing for me. I
looked at the drawing and found it
full of anger about how I had led
that day's class.
I could hardly focus on the three
remaining women, still entwined in a
tender, playful dance. When we
finally- gathered in a circle, I shared
how difficult it had been for me to
remain present with the dancing
while others left the class. They said
they had been so engrossed in what
they were doing, that they had not
noticed the others leave. They
assured me that they had had a
wonderful time, told me how much
they had learned through the whole
series, and encouraged me to keep
developing the work. As they spoke,
my little-girl feelings of shame and
abandonment drained away. I realiz-
ed that I had been paralyzed by
"shoulds," voices in my head like
the voices of my former mentors in
the dream, criticizing my choices as a
teacher, telling me how I had failed
to deliver.
In the weeks that followed, people
who had disappeared from class and
some who had seemed ambivalent
called to tell me how important the
work had been to them and were
eager to sign up for the next series. I
could see that in allowing more parts
of myself to be present in class, I
had opened the door for more parts
of everybody to be there. However, I
didn't know how to fully support
this process which, while sometimes
allowing people to tap into nurturing
and delightful movement, at other
times brought them up against their
deepest patterns of discomfort.
I have always understood Contact
Improvisation as a healing activity.
Through my study of developmental
patterning, I now understand more
specifically that I was drawn to Con-
tact not only by love of movement,
but also by my vast unsatisfied need
for nurturing, non-sexual touch,
especially for compression, the kind
of pushing into the body that, as in-
fants, tells us where we are, gives us
our sense of self. Pushing against
resistance allows us to develop the
strength to reach beyond ourselves
into our environment. While modern
dance training helped me reclaim my
body as a source of learning and ex-
pression, Contact Improv satisfied
my need to connect with others
directly, through bodily sensation
and the physical laws of motion that
affect us all. Having the weight of
my adult body met, I rediscover
baby joy, trust and expansiveness.
Yet, offering ourselves these
pleasures may restimulate old hurts,
fears and unresolved conflicts that
live in our tissues, in the very pat-
terns of our movements. The people
coming to my classes these days are
not necessarily dancers or even
"movers." They are people on a
pathway of personal growth, in-
terested in expanding the range of
choices in their lives. Many have
mapped their emotional, spiritual or
energetic terrain, but still experience
their bodies as largely unexplored
territory. They want to understand
how inner movement translates into
movement in the world of form,
space, objects and relationships.
They may appreciate the importance
of hanging out with emotional or
spiritual discomfort in order to free
up old patterns, but may never have
experienced this process in their
bodies, challenged by gravity,
momentum, and other people's
physical presence.
In my classes I had created permis-
sion for people to move with their
bodies' desires. But at some deeper
level in myself, I was still taking
responsibility for the "success" or
"failure" of the class. Judging that
success (and myself) by how unified
the energy of the room felt, how ful-
ly people disclosed their experience,
how much they said they had learn-
ed, what the dancing looked like, I
was still not comfortable with each
person having their own experience
of the class. Because my sense of
self-worth depended on my judgment
of the feeling in the room, none of
us were completely free to enjoy the
sense of individuality which would
support our interconnectedness.
Gradually, I have come to ap-
preciate in my teaching what I ex-
perience in my dancing: meeting
resistance, physically and emotional-
ly, creates support. Defining a
boundary-where you end and
something or someone else begins-
empowers you to reach beyond your
own kinesphere, past the edge of
your known experience. Yet, at
another level of perception, what ap-
pears solid and static can be perceiv-
ed as spacious and moving: a wall or
a person that seems an impermeable
VolumelS 1990
barrier may be viewed on the
molecular level as many small
vortexes of energy with vast spaces
in between. At this level, the very
idea of "boundary" loses meaning,
the "resistance" shifts, perhaps
disappears!
Contact work engenders such
perceptual shifts; to integrate them
requires a safe environment where
we can learn to listen to and trust
our bodily experience without fear or
self-judgment. Recently, my learning
process has included the ReParen-
ting'm work of Constance Abbott.
Body-Mind Centering taught me that
support precedes movement.
ReParenting encourages people not
only to understand and feel what
messages we needed and deserved to
receive from our families at different
stages in our development, but to
create situations in our adult lives
which can provide the support we
missed then and need now. It is, in
some ways, a reframing process: we
learn to look at our experience dif-
ferently and can then choose to act
differently, to not perpetuate pain.
Contact Improvisation, Body-Mind
Centering and other body-based
educational and therapeutic modes
take us beyond a mental reframing
into the physical experience of how
messages-both past and current-
are encoded in our bodies. When we
can feel movement patterns, we can
allow them to dissolve on a cellular
level, a tissue level, and reclaim the
power of active choice, balanced by
receptive flow, in our movement and
our lives.
In last winter's classes, I had
created permission for my students
and myself to follow inner desires, to
enjoy movement, to meet resistance.
But I hadn't known how to establish
enough safety for all of us to hang
out at the edge of our comfort zones
and to let movement happen from
that edge.
For many people, the mere fact of
participating in a group is unsafe.
Groups are often places where our
bodily experience must be repressed
or denied. As the main model for
group interaction in our society, the
nuclear family provides a setting-
echoed in schools, workplaces, and
community groups-where members
are often ignored, stifled or actively
abused. We have few models for get-
ting our individual needs met while
supporting others in the context of a
group. Contact work, which asks of
us the vulnerable acts of giving and
receiving support with our bodies,
can easily remind people how they
have been wounded time and again
in relationships and group situations.
It requires courage to return to the
place where one has been hurt and
to open oneself to the possibility of
a different outcome. This is a heal-
ing potential of Contact.
My job, then, I realized, as a
teacher, is to create a safe structure
for the learning process; and that job
includes, but is not limited to, the
teaching of physical skills. The need
for these skills, it seems to me, an-
nounces itself as people trust enough
to push their own limits. To reach
that place requires an initial set of
boundaries or clear parameters for
the class. Feeling safe is not the
same thing as being comfortable.
Safety entails trusting a situation
enough to risk trying out the new,
the uncomfortable. In order to re-
main at the threshold of discomfort
where I can let go of old patterns of
movement, thinking, and being and
make other choices, I have to know
where the support is, where the
Tom Thoreson and Teri Carter, Milwaukee.
photo: George Johnson
Volume 15 1990
· CQ/CI Sourcebook 189
boundaries are, from which dir~ctfon
gravity is pulling. Being safe is
knowing where the edges are, not
deciding in advance what I'm going
to do about them.
This spring I decided to write
down all the things I needed to feel
safe teaching my Contact class. I
realized that the first person for
whom I must create safety is myself,
that if I took the initiative, then
those in the class would feel freer to
create it for themselves. When it
came to actually saying these things
to my class, I got scared of sounding
rigid, authoritarian. I remembered
the exhilarating bodily and emotional
freedom of my first Contact ex-
periences (with Mangrove in the '70s)
which exploded me into new dance
territory. Yet, those early experiences
were frightening too; I felt unsup-
ported, jerked around. I hurt myself
by pushing too far and not knowing
how to let go. Perhaps my desire
now for clear parameters is not so
much a betrayal of the '60s spirit of
anarchy that attracted me to Con-
tact, as a need for a less violent,
more knowledgeable doorway to the
freedoms it allows us to reclaim.
In the first class of my spring
Making Contact series, despite my
misgivings, I took the risk of sharing
everything I had written. Not only
did it feel good, but people thanked
me for stating my boundaries so
clearly. They went on to work for
two hours, even the first-timers, in a
deep and inspiring way, and to share
amazing insights for a group that
had just met. As the series progress-
ed, people remained present, their
focus, mutual support and honesty
in sharing their experience deepening
throughout the weeks. My own
energy and commitment to teaching
expanded with each class.
I offer these Guidelines for Con-
tact Class, understanding that each
community and its needs are dif-
ferent, that they reflect both the
direction of my personal work and
the kind of students that work is at-
tracting in Minnesota. I offer them
in the spirit of sharing information,
in the hope that they will be helpful
to other practitioners of Contact
who are encountering similar issues.
J
GUIDELINES FOR CONTACT CLASS
• This is a movement class not a
therapy group, but the work is
charged because it deals with the
body in a deep way and because it
involves touching. For this reason I.
feel it necessary to lay out some
basic guidelines for our work
together.
• Class will begin on time (JO am).
If an emergency comes up and
you're going to be late, please give
me a call at home before 9:30 am to
let me know. ·
• Call me in advance if you have to
miss class.
you. Because each person comes with
different needs, the guided warm-up
may not feel right for you. Always
feel free to follow your body's
desire. Sometimes the check-in may
come after the individual warm-up
time. We will then do partner work
exploring an idea, image or par-
ticular skill, and then may do a
group dance structure.
• I see my role not as teaching you
how io dance, but as creating a
space where we can all allow
<.ourselves fo begin or to continue
·· reme,,,bering and reexperiencing the
,:4ance&;(ll@af1y inside. us. I will give
• This work encourages us to have · .. : .suggiitftJ:rtStl~d teach skills t~at
· our full range of sensuality and may, . . (f1light heljJ you aCCtrSS som~, un-
at times, bring up SeXual feelings~ To :'ic,onsci?tis:ar timid part of Y,OUrselj.
:;;:~1e~if:eZzc~ O:,~!~a;:,r:g}~~:i: ·••·· ::'·. ;~:tfa!Jo'f:"ti~~;~;~;";e~;~.;;.,~{ ·•··
weeks of the class; andlwill notbe '!!.nergies, physical stnictu,f'es.~ ~iftories
:=:.:'::r.@:ff~~Wri~~,ti;''~~i~~~····
class. Always fee/free to sit .;G'.;~·.1 ""· · d. ..... a ... n.··.ci •.. ·.: .. · .... ·.'.!' ... '.=.'· ·• ,,,,
something out or:stop somethingHrfr: ·•'.;:;=:;'" ·· · ·· ·''.•
the middle if.it's not comfortable~ If··~·~; •· .• >}};,: .... ~~l~elg6o ··· .... '!me~f
you feel you need to' leave in the •,' ''.;: ' .. the things we do may be new dnd' '.
middle of a class; please tell me'yoii. · .. , , frightening; They maYbring you to
are going. Watching class is ii/ways ·•·· ... '. ' •.the efige of your comfort ione. that
an option and one which can provide .·threshold of discomfort is afruitjul
lots of learning. !encourage you to ·place to learn and grow, as long as
be here even if you don't do what "you're not hurting yourself. But you
the group is doing. You can share , . can also allow yourself to bask in
what you are feeling and ask for 'the pleasure of things that feel good.
support. · The challenge of this dancing is to
• Class will generally begin with a keep finding a balance between what
check-in followed by a guided in- feels scary and new, and what feels
dividual JVarm:..up. This is a chance to connect with your own body and safe and good. (This is how babies
learn!) * .
feel the energy of the group around
DIANE ELLIOT is an independent
choreographer and movement teacher
based in Minneapolis. She has enjoyed
watching, doing and teaching Contact for
11 years. This article was written with
support from the Center for Arts
Criticism in St. Paul, MN. She invites
your responses to the piece, either
through CQ or to her directly.
190 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 15 1990
STILL MOVING, , . after all these years
by Jerry Zientara
In my life as an animal, Contact
Improvisation has been one of the
brightest illuminations, helping me in
the search for wisdom, happiness
and the meanings of life. Contact
has been a catalyst in my relation to
the world, opening my dancing and
giving me a world to dance in.
Since I was a small child I have
surfed on the urge to create little
worlds of my own. I have been pro-
ducer and director, writer and per-
former, designer and clean-up crew
over and over in order to dwell in
the magic reality of an altered, im-
agined society. Contact, in its all-
absorbing concentration of attention
and array of options, gave me hope
and an example of physical/meta-
physical freedom. I hungered to ex-
pand the inward state of being in the
flow of movement, turn it inside-out
and make an arena of total
involvement.
In 1982 I began going to jack-off
parties. Lessons about weight and
?u~render, momentum and timing,
mt1macy and respect for the partner
vital in Contact were also vital
amidst hot, horny men eager to play
together. In both Contact and the
j/o scene, trust, good humor and
sensitive touch invite the interper-
sonal rapport, and generate above
and beyond the physical sharing an
atmosphere of generous welcome.
Unwilling to be merely a partici-
pant, I felt my dictatorial drives
push me to become an organizer of
the San Francisco JACKS in 1984
and the next year I was one of th~
circle of radical artists who aimed to
conquer the epidemic of FADS
(Fear, Anger, Doubt and Sorrow) by
becoming the Healing Order of
Kthar Sissies. The party animal
within me emerged as Dogtor Woof!
Semiremide and I began to ad-
ministrate, mediate and realize
clinics, parties, rituals and
ceremonies dedicated to healing of
the self and the planet. Dance had
become movement, theatre had
become paratheatre, my Contact
group had become a support net-
work and dining club; as the '80s
rolled along, religion, money, art
and sex twisted and turned into
something almost coherent,
something like a big jewel lighting
my way.
For the last four years, my
endeavors have included mixed
events for men and women, of gay,
lesbian, bisexual, heterosexual, wild,
shy, s/m and other persuasions
widening my outlook and expa~ding
my provincialism beyond the ex-
clusively gay men's milieu.
Recently I went to a Contact
weekend where I discovered many
folks deeply embroiled in anxieties
about intimacy, attraction and other
psychoerotic phenomena within the
context of our movement form. At
last, I thought, my studies might
apply to the world of Contact, where
I got so many good ideas in the first
place. Currently I am looking for
ways to offer some of the lore I
have won to contactors who once
again surround me. I am meditating
on drills, exercises, articulations of
some of the attraction/repulsions,
curiosities, fears and delights movers·
report that verge on and merge with
the psychoerotic. In private practice
as a planet therapist, I use breath,
mas~age, movement and counseling,
seekmg to heal psychic wounds, as
many of us have been doing all
along, directly and indirectly. The
duet of the skeleton and the breath
once my vision of the Contact dan~e,
has another dimension, crisscrossed
and united with the duet of the per-
sonality and the aura.
Attractions to certain partners
r~sistances that lead to challenge~,
difficulties leading to triumphs, the
darknesses required for stars to shine
in: these are among my current con-
siderations. How these notions apply
to Contact, how Contact applies to
me and others, how by dancing our
best we can heal ourselves and the
planet: these are among my favorite
thinks.
Found in a spin, loving the spin
I'm in, I remain your admiring stu-
dent and pal, relaying radiant
blessings!
Woof! *
JERRY ZIENTARA was part of Frxx Movix
a super-8 cinema corrmune, from 7 969-76 '
whose works include "Fur on Fire" and
"Artsport," a 7 975 movie on contact improv-
isation. 7 980, Grup Txatr D Frxx · 7 984
Hea!ing Order of Kthar Sissies, pa/atheatric
realizations and se/f-hea/ings. Currently
dancing again. He lives in San Francisco
where he massages bodies and rrinds.
Volume 15 1990
CQICI Sourcebook 191
-1 STILL MOVING (cont'd)
WHAT'S IN THE BAG?
Issues that lie in the shadow of Contact Improvisation
transcript of a discussion at the
2nd California Contact Festival, 6/10/89,
facilitated, edited and revised
by Martin Keogh and Kirk Andrews
In the issue that had "Questions
Not to Ask" [by Danny Lepkoff, CQ
Vol. 13:3], you put out the call for some
"meaty discussion." I think this will
provoke just that.
Over the months of working on this,
I have gone through feelings that range
from elation to alarm. Looking at the
form has reflected back on myself and
a lot of my own issues that are crying
out for attention. I hope that by putting
this material out to the community at
large, it will evoke the same for others.
[M.K.]
Keogh: A few months ago I had the idea
of having a discussion on the shadow
of Contact. I told Kirk, and he said he
was thinking of doing a panel on sex-
uality and Contact. We agreed they were
related, and decided to put them
together. We spent a lot of time
reaching into what we thought the
shadow was for ourselves personally,
and for the form as a whole. We came
up with an image that poet Robert Bly
uses to describe the shadow. He sees it
as a big bag that we drag behind us.
When something is too painful to deal
with, or there is something we don't
want to look at, we throw it in the bag.
When we were children, we threw a lot
of who we were into the bag from
parental and teacher disapproval and
their desire for us to be good little boys
and girls. And as adults we continue to
fill the bag. For some of us the bag is
so long that they're all blocked up in the
doorway.
Kirk asked me, "Why do you want
to delve into this shadow material?" I
thought about this and realized that it's
because I feel married to this form of
dance. It would be easy to trance out or
go on automatic and not confront the
stuff that over the years of dancing I've
put into the bag. Sometimes when I'm
in a duet and a beautiful moment opens
up, an opportunity for a spontaneous
ride, I say, 'Wait a minute while I get
my bag', and then the moment is lost.
Hopefully, by mucking around in the
muddled and uncomfortable aspects of
the shadow, we can get some stuff out
of the bag, so the dance can continue
to open up.
Andrews: The term 'shadow' has been
used for thousands of years as a literary
metaphor for the dark side, the under-
world of life. Carl Jung, of Analytic
Psychology fame, then picked it up and
used it as a more poetic way to describe
information that we repress and keep
down. There are a lot of things that we
have inside us that we don't show to the
outside world. Jung said we have a
"persona" character that we like to
show, and then a bunch of "shadow"
characters which are kept hidden. The
shadow is full of these characters. A lot
of them are quite creative and power-
ful (i.e., the thief, the witch, the tyrant)
but we are taught that they are unac-
ceptable. When we work on integrating
the shadow characters, by talking about
them, and bringing them into conscious
awareness, we release a lot of energy
that has been trapped there. The annoy-
ing thing is that just when we think we
have the shadow uncovered and figured
out, it changes into another form. In-
tegrating the shadow therefore becomes
a lifelong process of looking within
ourselves.
We hope this discussion today will
help us to bring out some of these
shadow issues that are very real but also
very difficult to talk about.
Keogh: One aspect is my pers~nal
shadow in the dance: "What am I bnng-
ing that I'm not wanting to look at?"
Then there is the shadow that is inherent
in the form itself. I've noticed as we
have looked at some of this, that
sometimes the material is offensive. The
ones I take offense at, the ones I get
defensive about, the ones where I say,
"No, that's not what Contact is about,''
are the ones I need to look at most
carefully.
We want to start by shining a bright
light at Contact so the shadow can
192 CQ;Cl Sourcebook
become nice and long and clear. Take
a moment to think of what you like best
about Contact, what brings you to the
form?
Participants: • The incredible
playfulness of everybody• Trust•. Con-
nection • Release • Cooperation •
Resonance• Total contact with some-
one • I feel like I get to be more fully
me than in anything else I do • Because
it helps bring out the shadow side of me
• Confronting my fear and my sense of
limitation • Physical and emotional risk
• Surprise • Touch • Freedom to push
• The accepted intimacy • I love the sen-
suality • The vitality • Inspiration to be
creative in all of my life • Getting energy
from non-energy• It's a metaphor for
all my relationships • Spontaneity •
Athleticism• Sportsmanship• Medita-
tion • Recognition •
Keogh: These statements demonstrate
why we love this form. Because we. l?ve
it we think it's healthy to turn a cntical
e;e towards the form and our participa-
tion in it. One way that Kirk and I have
been working on this is to look at what
we like then delve into what's behind
that. If.I like how playful everybody is,
does that suggest we have a group of
people who refuse to grow up? If this
idea bothers you, you might be near the
shadow. Today, let that be a guide.
Here are five questions to work with
in your small groups:
• What do I deny or repress to do this
form?
• What do I like too much about this
form?
• What do I experience in this form that
I don't like to acknowledge?
•What's missing for me in this form?
•What's missing in the Contact
community?
(The group splits into eight small groups
who talk with different levels of anima-
tion. We get back together.)
Keogh: We would like to hear a few
statements from each group. The rest of
us will try to hold back the impulse to
make it all better, or say you're wrong,
or you're ok, or that's not my ex-
perience. We will just try to hear it.
Group one: We talked about two main
categories. One was sexuality and the
other, community. There is a blurred
distinction between sensuality and
eroticism, and the lines often blur in the
dance. . . One person said that
sometimes women he'd be dancing with
spoke about feeling aggressive sexuali-
ty from their male partners, and they
didn't know how to deal with it, and
Volume 15 1990
Volume 15 1990 CQ/CI Sourcebook 193
usually would excuse themselves to go
get water.
Participant: Uh oh, you blew thefr cover
now.
Group one: With community, the in-
dividual often judging what the com-
munity wanted from them. It came back
to not knowing who you are yourself,
changing how you act to fit the
community.
Group two: Honesty vs. niceness, how
do you let someone know you dislike
them and don't want to dance with
them. Is it better to be honest and just
tell them so, or be nice ... Culture came
up. A lot of us seem to be from the same
background ... Everyone in our group
is involved in academic institutions, and
really get into our heads, is this a haven
for our bodies to express themselves?
Group three: What do I experience that
I don't like to acknowledge?: fear of
physical danger, of rejection and
vulnerability. How do I judge who I
dance with or don't dance with and how
do I tell them? Men holding back their
weight from women ... What's missing
for me in this form?: The completeness
of the intimacy. This sense that it is ok
to be intimate within certain parameters
but it doesn't extend even to sometimes
saying goodbye to someone after class.
One of the most frustrating parts of this
form is describing it to people who don't
know it. A definition! ... What do I like
too much about this form?: Again, in-
timacy, sensuality, letting go of the
mind, just sort of checking out or
o.d.ing on the experience, not knowing
when to stop just because 'it's there' ...
What do I deny to do this form?: fear
of physical danger. Sexuality: the fear
of being exposed, fear of rejection, of
not looking good, the judgement that
I don't know how to do it. The judge-
ment that I am not trained enough to
do it. .. What's lacking in the com-
munity?: a lack of professionalism, in
presentations and facilities.
Group four: We talked about feeling
vulnerable about approaching people
and feeling insecurity around skill
levels ... Someone had discomfort dan-
cing with the opposite sex, and had a
desire to know them better to feel more
trust before dancing with them ... The
difficulty of making eye contact while
dancing, which seems paradoxical in
such an intimate situation ... Someone
was disturbed by the lack of blacks and
minority groups.
Group five: Somebody asked does
194 CQ/CI Sourcebook
anybody feel grief or other strong emo-
tions while doing Contact? We had all
had some intense experience, either
remembering something from our
childhood, or something that made us
want to cry. . . We talked about how
difficult it is to do Contact and be in a
relationship. Both with a partner who
does Contact or one who doesn't. How
do you communicate to your partner
that this is only Contact, we're not
having sex here ... We also talked about
how the community is very
homogeneous. We are mostly white,
well educated, and lacking ethnic
cultures and people with handicaps.
Group six: We talked about talking too
much about emotions and the kind of
philosophical baggage that comes with
the form. Why do we have these kinds
of discussions? Both perspectives of it
being baggage and opportunity. . . We
talked about fears of intimacy, liking
parts of the form too much, so it goes
into a dangerous area, such as liking be-
ing touched too much, and then becom-
ing dependent on it. We talked about
dreams.
Group seven: We talked about snob-
bisms in the community. That fashion
awareness is very repressed ... and some
liked too much the availability of attrac-
tive women. (lots of varied reactions)
Group eight: Injuries; people feeling
they are put aside and not talked about
even though they very much affect the
form ... We also talked about the com-
munity as a whole not having a defined
sense of what Contact is, and letting it
develop and grow out of that, it's a
"free for all" kind of deal.
Participant: Contact also has a
smugness about it, vis a vis the modern
dance community. It's a mutual thing,
we often say modern dance is very
mechanical, and something is missing in
it. And about Contact, their's is a
thread about a lack of discipline, a lack
of professionalism, focus, we take
refuge in our own spontaneity and struc-
turelessness and our unwillingness to
work with crafting things.
Andrews: Any time you put out that
you are better than someone else, one
has to wonder if the shadow part is say-
ing, "We feel less than ... "
Keogh: Kirk and I have come up with
some statements, or "judgements"
about Contact that we hope will bring
some of the shadow out into the light.
Some are more serious than others. We
would like to put these out, and then we
can make the impossible jump of try-
ing to at least resolve our talk today.
After we came up with this list we split
them into four categories:
•Power •
•The Form
• Gender & Sexuality
• Personal (a catchall for those that
are hard to categorize)
We decided not to put these down as
questions but as statements. We will
start with the Power category:
•We are always in a supportive role
with one another, seldom in a conflict
role. There's very little conflict in this
community.
Participant: ... little that gets express-
ed anyway. (laughter)
Keogh: • We are all big fish in a little
pond and there are no predators.
Because the form is about support and
flowing and acknowledging, the form
attracts people who aren't very
powerful.
• We are people with a complete lack
of boundaries.
• There is no overt competition, there
are no levels of attainment, no accolades
to be reached. So you can do this form
forever and never get any acknowledge-
ment for it.
• We are a group who tends to have a
failure streak. (heated reaction)
Participant: Is there any group that
doesn't?
Keogh: Remember, we don't have to de-
fend the form right now.
• No one in our community is outstan-
ding or excels in their own field. (more
heated reaction)
Participant: What are these????
Keogh: These are statements.
Participant: That someone else made,
that you made, that you believe, that
someone believes???
Keogh: These are possible shadow
statements. Some of them we came up
with looking at what is good about Con-
tact, some are our own speculation,
some we heard from others, and some
are from people looking at the form
from the outside.
Participant: Ahhhhh! That explains it!
(laughter)
Andrews: These are generalizations.
Participant: I have a difficult time with
some.
Andrews: That may be a sign that they
are in your shadow, we usually don't
Volume 15 1990
like, and are critical of, what we hold
in the shadow.
Participant: I want you to take respon-
sibility as the person who reads these
statements. It's like someone else is try-
ing to define who I am, and I resent
that. I ask that the person reading these
put them in an "I" form.
Andrews: That's a good thing to say but
our answer is no. I hear what you want
and we talked a lot about how to do
this.
Keogh: We decided that because the
form is so supportive and "I" based and
nonconfrontive that we would simply
put these out as statements.
Andrews: They include us, but I can't
take responsibility for them all because
I don't believe them all. This is to fuel
the discussion. We are not saying, this
is how you are, or how the form is, but
these are possibilities of our shadow in
this form. If these statements don't
apply to you, just let them go by with
a laugh. If they draw a reaction from
you,_ it is worth reflecting on your reac-
tion. That is a part of our purpose.
Keogh: Under the category of The
Form:
• There is no connection in this form
between discipline and art. It makes no
artistic statement.
• There's a hierarchy based on who gets
the highest rides, who shows off the
best.
• It is a form for latent gays and
perverts.
• We suffer from naive idealism, with
ideas of egalitarianism and "organic
process."
Andrews: In the Gender and Sexuality
category:
• We're getting off on breaking the
incest taboo. We get to have a kind of
sexual experience with lots and lots of
people who are more family than lovers.
• Men are better at Contact than
women. (oohs and laughter)
• It fosters an androgynous sexuality.
It turns men into women and women
into men.
Keogh: Look at our apparel.
Andrews: • The emotional and the sex-
ual get cut off to do this dance.
Under the Personal category:
• One thing I don't like to acknowledge
is that I'm good at this form. My brag-
gart has been kept in shadow.
• Contacters are slaves to their sensa-
tions and feelings. If we gave as much
weight to our ideas, we would be called
Volume 15 1990
fanatics. (whew/ no, no/ again!)
• Contacters are slaves to their sensa-
tions and feelings. If we gave as much
weight to our ideas, we would be called
fanatics. And possibly would be much
more powerful in the world with that
force behind our convictions and beliefs
rather than our physical bodies.
• We are trying to fill the hole where we
don't feel loved.
• We are all leftovers from, or resent
having missed, the '60s and the
touchy/feely/group-gropes. (moan)
• This issue of everyone being so playful
and not wanting to grow up. The Peter
Pan syndrome.
Participants: Hallelujah! I Let's just
change the definition of growing up I
some of this stuff doesn't sound like
shadow but conscious choices.
Andrews: Like we said, there's a lot of
creativity and pow:r in the shadow.
Participant: Whenever we talk about
sexuality /intimacy, getting into our
bodies, we take on the morality we grew
up with, rather than celebrating this
thing that brings up our feelings of in-
timacy, that nurtures us, that fills the
gaps, the holes where we feel unloved.
I feel when we talk about this, it's as if
we are getting off on something we
shouldn't. I'd like to see more of a sense
of celebration over these things.
Andrews: That is true, and, for right
now we are here to dig up the muck
more than to celebrate.
Participant: I like that. I'm not saying
we shouldn't be digging. I just wanted
to say that the terms sexuality and sen-
suality always get lumped into the
muck.
Participant: We have to dig them up to
celebrate them.
Participant: I see the focus on two
forms of shadow. There's our own in-
ternal blockages, that may get in the
way of the dance (or help the dance).
And then there is this cultural stuff that
we grew up with. IN essence, we are
here to turn that stuff upside down and
explore the side of it we never got to see
the first 20 or 30 or 40 years of our lives.
The culture is driven by fanaticism on
a certain level, the fanaticism of
dominating the world and repressing
our feelings about that. Here we are tur-
ning it upside down: it's not our place
to be powerful out in the world in a
driving way. We can't challenge what's
out there with the same behavior as that
which we are challenging. So, it's very
appropriate, at this stage in the evolu-
tion of the form and the community to
be very introspective and visible.
Keogh: I feel we're trying to elevate this
material. I don't think we are ready to
do that. We haven't been down in the
shadow long enough yet.
Participant: I noticed my emotional
responses to some of these statements.
Some went right by and others got stuck
in me. Like hearing an old judgement
I used to have about myself from the
culture. Boy, there was a lot of reaction
happening among us in response to
many of these. I would encourage
everybody to look at the ones you had
the most inner discomfort with and ask
what's happening here. Clearly there's
a lack of resolution around a lot of these
issues. I appreciate the statements be-
ing read the way they were because they
were spoken the way my internal judge
speaks them.
Andrews: One of the benefits of look-
ing at the shadow is you get a lot of
energy back. If we are powerless, the
power is in the shadow, if we are
playful, the adult is in the shadow, if we
are shy and afraid, the confident one is
in the shadow. It makes it worthwhile
to go there. Secondly, I think it's im-
portant for our community to look at
the shadow and look at what's missing
in order to be a real community and not
a pseudo community that's superficial.
Call it community maintenance. We
can't say, "Oh, we talked about that
last year," and then let it go. We have
to keep working with it. One of the
things that I want to acknowledge is that
our community does a good job of talk-
ing about issues. That has been especial-
ly true at some of the Harbin jams.
Hopefully today will have raised up
some questions that we can continue to
work with. This is an ongoing process,
seek out a friend if you need to talk with
someone. We need to close for now.
Keogh: Before we get active, let's sit
quietly for a moment and review what
this discussion has evoked. *
Special thanks to Dawn Weiss and Dan
Matson for transcribing the tapes of this
event.
CQICI Sourcebook :J9j
The following is an article about
my career in contact improvisation.
During the time I was doing Con-
tact, I often felt unappreciated and
shut out by other contacters because
Mark Pritchard.
I wouldn't toe the line on Cl's rela-
tion to New Age issues. This article
looks back on that period and traces
my involvement in the form. [M.P.]
MY RISE & FALL IN CONTACT IMPROV
by Mark Pritchard --------------
1. In 1974, after seeing a visiting
dance company during my senior
year in high school, I sign up for
modern dance P.E. as a freshman in
college. Astonished that I had made
such an effeminate choice, my
parents make me switch to
basketball-which, since I'm only
5 '4", I hate.
2. Three years later, a fellow
writer on the college newspaper in-
vites me to a performance by
Deborah Hay, who has just moved
to Austin. "She's kind of a hippie,
but you may like it anyway," my
friend predicts. I hate the first half
of the show, and then love the se-
cond. A few months later, I take the
first dance classes of my life with
Hay. One of the core members of
the Judson Dance group, Hay's
classes during the late '70s are run
with a kind of New Age anti-elitist
philosophy, in which everybody is
allowed to think they can dance.
Fortunately this includes me.
3. During the next two years, I
learn a philosophy of movement and
performance from Hay. At the same
studio in Austin, I also take modern
dance and contact improvisation. I
get a crush on every one of my
196 CQICI Sourcebook
teachers. I even become brave
enough to take modern dance at
other studios. After two years, I'm
in the best physical shape of my life.
More important, the realm of dance
has been opened to me. Best of all I
love contact improvisation; learning
how to do it is like relearning a
language I had once spoken and then
forgotten.
4. After a terrific summer, the
core group of contacters that began
in my class slowly fades away until
I'm literally the only one left who
wants to do contact anymore.
Frustrated with this and other
evidence that Austin is full of space-
outs who don't really want to do
anything, I move to San Francisco.
It's 1979.
5. One of the reasons I moved to
San Francisco is that I knew I could
do contact improvisation here.
Mangrove, the most successful of CI
groups, is at the peak of its career,
and there are several other active
groups. As soon as I get to San
Volume 15 1990
Francisco, I head up to Vancouver
Island to take part in a two-week
long jam. I'm excited to think that
at last I'll be among people who like
doing contact as much as I do, in-
cluding all of Mangrove and most of
Cl's biggest luminaries from across
the continent.
6. Unfortunately, these stars seem
mostly interested in dancing with
each other rather than with nobodies
like me. I'm not the only person
who feels this way; three days into
the event, there is a general discus-
sion about elitism. The CI stars pro-
test that they don't have to dance
with anybody they don't want to.
7. Intimidated by Mangrove's
self-preservation stance and feeling
insecure, I link up with the only
dancer at the event who's really
friendly to me, a contact teacher
from San Francisco named Keriac.
When I get back to the city, I join
her group, Walkabout Dance
Collective.
8. Walkabout had been formed a
couple of years before by en-
thusiastic participants at a big CI
conference of some kind in Berkeley.
As a new nobody in town, I'm
grateful for how they welcome me
and the skills I learned in Texas.
Three months after I arrive, I do my
own performance, in which some of
Walkabout's members participate, a
mixture of poetry, film, music and
dance. It's a fair success.
9. I also start attending contact
classes taught by Alan Ptashek, who
had been one of the only people will-
ing to show me a few things at the
event on Vancouver Island, and I go
to all the CI jams. There are a lot of
friendly, enthusiastic people to dance
with, and I'm really glad I came to
San Francisco.
10. But there are some currents
that I don't understand, even in this
non-elitist group. During rehearsals
for my piece at Walkabout, it
became clear that there was a
misunderstanding about whether the
performance was going to be a col-
lective process or mainly my crea-
tion. Ten days after the show, I visit
one of the performers. At first she
tactfully criticizes my creative pro-
cess, but then gets angrier and
angrier when it seems I don't under-
stand. After a long tirade, in which
she calls me sexist-which deeply
disturbs me, since in Texas I seemed
to be one of the most feminist men
Volume 15 1990
around-she throws me out of her
apartment.
11. In November, seven months
after I arrived in San Francisco, I do
my second performance, in which
the main piece is a long apology for
all the things I've been criticized
about, like being macho, walking too
heavily, not melting sincerely
enough, and not trusting my feel-
ings. Afterwards, the woman who
threw me out of her apartment
comes up to me and says, "Mark,
Mark, I loved your piece."
12. I like Walkabout because we
have our own studio, and a
twice-monthly performance series, so
I get plenty of chances to do my
own work and interact with others in
the community. Even better, we all
support each other on our projects,
even if we privately realize it's not
very good art. It's great to be ac-
cepted and to belong to a real
creative group.
13. In addition to my involvement
with Walkabout, I help produce the
Bay Area Contact Network (BACN)
newsletter, and I take it upon myself
to show up on time at every single
Sunday jam in Golden Gate Park, in
case someone new comes on time
(everyone else is always late). I go to
performances by Mangrove and
other groups. I conscientiously
develop my skills in Alan's class and
in workshops taught by visitors like
Andrew Harwood. I collaborate with
others on several shows. I get fired
from a job for reproducing the pro-
gram for a show on the office
copier.
14. Eventually, through sheer ef-
fort if not dance ability, I begin to
belong. I stop being a nobody and
become one of the people closer to
the center of the CI community. I'm
always ready to do the door at my
friends' shows; I produce a couple of
large contact improvisation concerts,
one to benefit CQ, the other for
abortion rights. I do my own pieces
at Walkabout shows every two or
three months. The peak of this
period is mid-1981.
15. All during this time, however,
as I practice contact improvisation
for performance and as a pure move-
ment form, I'm utterly bored by the
aspects of CI that have to do with
health, chiropractic, "healing,"
various New Age therapeutic
"techniques," and mysticism. A title
of a typical article in CQ at this
time, when it seemed that the only
way to salvation was to become as
healthy and "natural" as possible,
was "Can the Body Ransom Us?"
[by Maxine Sheets Johnstone, CQ
Vol IV:3 I 4; Summer 79].
16. In reaction to all this, I write an
article entitled "New Age Shuf-
fleboard," in which I warn that an
emphasis by contacters on all this
"healing" will lead CI away from
art and performance and into some
post-hippie suburb of the soul. My
article is published in the BACN
newsletter and reprinted in CQ [Vol
VI:l, Fall 80]. Some people like it,
although they don't agree with me.
The number of people who are will-
ing to approach CI as a performing
medium rather than as therapy, and
to collaborate with me on CI pro-
jects, gets fewer. I start to feel like a
lone voice crying in the wilderness.
17. By mid-1981, the people of
Walkabout and I have gone about as
far as we can go together; I've
started doing theater and music and
they aren't really the people I want
in my pieces anymore. I leave the
group and start another CI group
called Tangent Dance Collective with
some friends from jams. We do a
one-night "tour" to a small town
100 miles away, and plan a trip to
Santa Fe, NM. One week before the
Santa Fe trip, the other male in the
group decides that it wouldn't be the
best thing for his process. We cancel
the trip and the group breaks up.
18. The moves I like to do most in
CI involve jumps and carrying. Me
and some other males start practicing
these at a jam one evening. Flying
through the air and throwing each
other around, we're having a terrific
time. Then some women start teasing
us, singing "Macho, macho men"
after a currently popular disco song.
"Mark, the jumping is fun, but you
should really learn to melt more,''
one of them tells me later. "Get in
touch with your receptive side."
Around the same time, a contact im-
provisation teacher tells me
mysteriously, "You need to realize
your beginner's mind more." I don't
have the slightest idea what he's talk-
ing about.
19. At some point in 1982, the at-
tendance at jams really starts to fall
off. The jams in the park fade away
and eventually it seems that no one
except me is interested in doing CI
as performance, although you can
CQICI Sourcebook 197
see CI from time to time in
choreography by some local modern
dancers. The BACN newsletter stops
publishing. Mangrove breaks up into
two competing groups. Meanwhile
my performances start to contain
much less dance and much more
theater and music. There are fewer
and fewer CI events to go to, and
my attention is taken by my writing
and theater projects.
20. I still believe in CI that has an
artistic emphasis. I write a couple of
articles for CQ, but they're rejected.
I organize a symposium of con-
tacters, with a panel made up mostly
of people who were the bigwigs when
I arrived in town 5 years before. We
talk about what we think the future
of contact improvisation is. There is
no consensus, not even towards
therapy. In fact, everybody sounds
really depressed about the future of
Contact. This is the last CI event I
contribute to. Although there are
still a few classes going on, the Con-
tact scene that was booming when I
arrived in town seems dead.
21. In early 1983, while the roof
of Walkabout's building is being
repaired by a landlord whom we
suspect wants all the artists out
anyway, there is a huge
thunderstorm. Water destroys the
dance floor at Walkabout's studio,
and the collective seems ready to
disappear. I feel glad to have gotten
out when I did. Meanwhile, my non-
dance performing is going strong. I
also go back to school and become a
high school English teacher.
22. By 1986, I've spent several
years doing only theater and music.
With two dancers who know nothing
about CI, I form a group called
Short on Attitude, which is dedicated
to doing dance and performance art.
I choreograph a wildly energetic
dance piece that has almost no con-
tact improvisation. There's nobody
around to tell me I have to melt or
be natural, or do things according to
a party line, but I am learning about
melting in another realm. I get in-
volved in s-m and learn, in a sub-
missive role, what being receptive
really means.
23. I go to Japan and teach
English for 2 years in a stultifying
provincial city.
24. When I return to San Fran-
cisco in late 1988, I attend a sort of
Walkabout reunion. It seems they
sued the landlord for the ruined
198 CQJO Sourcebook
dance floor and won a settlement;
we go out to an expensive dinner
with part of the money. It's fun to
catch up on what people are doing
these days. One of the people at the
dinner used to be a big wheel in the
CI community. I ask him what he's
doing these days. "Holding safe sex
orgies," he replies. I get his phone
number.
25. Keriac, whom I also see at this
dinner for the first time in years, has
become successful teaching contact
improvisation in Europe. She makes
enough there in six months to live in
San Francisco for the other six
months.
26. I resume doing pieces with
Short on Attitude. Meanwhile, a
group called Contraband, made up
of people who are artistic descen-
dants of Mangrove, is becoming
well-known using CI, along with
other kinds of postmodern dance, in
choreography. Another rising com-
pany called the High Risk Group
does the same. In fact, although
there are no performances anywhere
of plain contact improvisation, you
see scraps of CI in almost every
modem dance performance and even
in rock videos.
27. Short on Attitude sponsors a
low-tech performance series. To my
surprise, a group of contacters signs
up to do a piece, and I eagerly put
them on the bill. When they per-
form, they make all the worst
mistakes that I made, and learned
not to do, ten years before. I feel
disgusted, as if all the lessons we had
learned in the early '80s, all the pro-
gress we tried to make, had been in
vain.
28. I later learn, from an ex-
Walkabout member, that CI is in-
deed making a comeback, especially
in Berkeley. There are lots of classes
and well-attended jams. Hearing this,
I don't want to go at all. I feel I
gave Contact the best of my energy,
enthusiasm and support, back in the
days when I was young and impres-
sionable, and that all my efforts
were wasted because my priorities
were different from other people's.
If I went back now, I'd probably get
ripped off again. Also I'm older and
fatter and wouldn't dance well. It's
not worth it.
Moral: Contact Improvisation,
when I discovered it, held a great
promise. It let me do things with my
t- THE CALIFORNIA
"HARBIN" JAM
A Brief History
by Sharon Tomsky ----
The California Contact Im-
provisation Jam at Harbin Hot
Springs continues to be an amazing,
delightful, challenging, evolving
phenomenon. The first one was held
in the Fall of 1986. We're now
working on the eighth Jam, which
will be the end of May, 1990. The
organizers are: Julie Oak, Penny
Paulus, David Russell, Robin Tren-
da, and myself. On occasion, due to
uncontrollable circumstances or by
choice, an individual organizer has
taken a Jam "off." For the past
year, Robin has discontinued his role
as an organizer, because of the vast
commitment he has made to
establishing and directing the new
Wall Street Center for the Arts in
Chico, CA.
In the Spring of '86, the 5 of us,
plus several other Bay Area Contac-
tors were at the Breitenbush Jam [in
Oregon]. Robin proposed a meeting
for exploratory talks for anyone in-
terested in starting a California jam.
During the week we must have had 4
or 5 meetings and the groundwork
I
oz
body I never thought I could; it
taught me valuable lessons in sexual
and social dynamics. But by insisting
that contacters follow a party line on
the relation of contact to health and
spirituality, and by neglecting
esthetic issues, the CI community
alienated me (and who knows how
many others?). If it's true that there
is a new upsurge of interest these
days, I would like to urge the CI
community not to do this again.
Don't spurn the priorities and in-
terests of new converts who love
contact improvisation and have a vi-
sion of what it could be. It's too late
for me, but it's not too late for you.
*
Ex-contactor MARK PRITCHARD is a
writer, performance artist, and publisher
of "Frighten The Horses," a magazine
about the sexu_al revolution.
Volwne 15 1990
was laid. We went home, fresh from
the excitement of Breitenbush, made
phone calls, decided on Harbin as
the site (mostly because of the
spacious Conference Center, the
mineral hot tubs and pools, and its
2Vi hour proximity to the Bay Area),
found a caterer, chose a date and the
ball was rolling. We had a solid ex-
ample from Breitenbush to draw
upon, and our own personal ex-
periences there helped shape our
ideas about how we wanted our jam
to be. Thanks to Alito Alessi and
Karen Nelson for creating the event
that inspired us.
We had the advantage of having a
large regional Contact Community as
a base, but still we decided to
minimize our risk and start small.
The first one was from Friday night
., to Sunday night, and was truly one
§1 of the most joyous and exhilarating
c3 weekends of my life. Everyone seem-
ed to feel that way. It was like giv-
ing birth, except that the labor had
seemed so easy! We decided not to
wait a whole year to do it again. The
2nd Jam was about 6 months later,
©
0 in May '87, and was expanded to 3
] days and nights.
c.. We've been doing them twice a
year ever since, one in the Fall (late
October, early November) and one in
~ the Spring (late April, early May).
!:'-- The 1990 schedule, however, has
·g, been changed drastically. The Con-
..: ference Center we use at Harbin
c (where we have a beautiful large,
iJ airy room, bathrooms, showers, a
~ small "guru" room, and hot & cool
15 pools all to ourselves) is in high de-
0' mand, and this year is not available
tf at our usual dates. Also, for years
;; people have been wanting a longer
E jam, and there is an ever-expanding
~ list of folks who want to come. We
c. always have a waiting list, though
·5 we've increased our maximum from
v B 40 to 55. So, we decided to try
gf' something different. This year we're
i having THREE Jams-all occurring
over holiday weekends [see Notice in
"CQ Newsletter"]. We will resume
our "regular" Spring/Fall schedule
Volume 15 1990
in '91.
What has been the effect of all
these Jams? Besides being a tremen-
dous source of enjoyment and op-
portunity for exploration and
development of our Contact, there
has been much bonding and inspira-
tion for other Contact activities. The
"Community" I speak of has grown
dramatically during these last four
years. It is still diverse, and not
everyone involved with Contact
comes to the Jams. But a strong,
vibrant and more organized group
continues to spawn, expand, create
and develop. The annual Contact
Festival emerged from an initial vi-
sion and discussion at one Harbin
Jam, spearheaded by Andrew
Clibanoff, who now lives on the East
Coast. The Contact Teachers Net-
work has taken shape-we now
cooperatively list all our classes,
workshops, jams and performances
together on one joint flyer. There
was an energetic effort to create a
Contact Community Center. Many
people devoted much time and
energy to this endeavor. Because of
the lengthy process we were pre-
empted in getting the studio we had
hoped to rent. For now, the 8th
Street Studio serves as our Berkeley
hub. There have been various perfor-
mance groups and series, as well as
Contact camping trips and picnics.
A 40-minute edited videotape titled
"Thank You For This Dance," has
been created by videographer/film-
maker Brandy Brawner and me. It
contains footage shot at the '87 and
'88 Harbin Jams. Copies are
available from me for $25 [see 'Con-
tacts' for address].
Although the majority of Harbin
J ammers do come from the Bay
Area, many have come from
throughout the West Coast, notably
Seattle, Portland and San Diego.
We strive to set up an environment
where everyone feels welcomed, in-
cluded; and that each person's feel-
ings, ideas and feedback are impor-
tant. We have daily group "sits"
and meetings (though we prefer to
call them "gatherings"). We have a
"dream pool" where people put out
their dreams and fantasies for things
they would like to have happen at
that Jam. There are group scores
and presentations. A memorable one,
initiated by Darshana [Ellis] from
San Diego, involved nude women
and paint. After much heated debate
about whether, where and when it
was going to happen, it turned out
to be an exquisite dance ritual per-
formed outside shortly before the
Sunday closing. Last Fall, Keriac
and others constructed a thoughtful
score which we all participated in,
processing our many deep and mixed
feelings following the Earthquake
("The Pretty Big One") which we
had just survived 1 Vi weeks before.
There is careful attention given to
group process and how Jam policies
and decisions are made. Participants'
written feedback at the end of each
Jam has proven invaluable. As
organizers, we have developed our
skills as facilitators-a role which
has proven to be both challenging
and rewarding.
And of course there's lots of Con-
tact. Dancing, jamming, classes,
more jamming. But I think what
makes the experience so rich is that
rather than being an isolated 2-hour
episode of Contact (like at a weekly
jam) it goes on 24 hours a day for 3
or 4 days. We live it and breathe it
together, as a group. We eat
together, sleep together (accommoda-
tions are either camping or com-
munal in the conference center), hot
tub together, hike, dance, talk, play,
drum, argue, sing, cry, laugh, hug,
etc. It feels so natural. I always feel
somehow more fully "me" at these
Jams than at practically any other
time. And I always feel so grateful
for this form which has so im-
measurably enriched my life; and for
the opportunity to serve, grow with,
and be part of this special Communi-
ty, which I know extends beyond the
Bay Area, beyond California,
beyond the U.S., even beyond
Europe and into at least parts of the
rest of the world. *
SHARON TOMSKY is a dancer, con-
tacter, and bodyworker. She teaches, per-
forms, & organizes contact events in the
San Francisco Bay Area.
CQICI Sourcebook 199
Bob Rease and Ernie Adams in "Bob Rease and Friends", San Francisco, 1981 200 CQICI Sourcebook (photographer unknown)
Volwne 16 1991
Volume 16
1991
cc
0
0
..c
c.
EDITOR NOTE
Last spring, in the North of
England, I felt the network working.
I'd never been to Scotland before, and
being so close, I wanted to go. I'd
heard there was a small group in Glas-
gow that did Contact Improvisation and
I was curious to meet and move with
them. A little asking around produced
a name and phone number for John
Macinnes (now in 'Contacts') and I
called to see if I might invite myself up
for a jam and when was it. As there
wasn't one planned for that week, one
was generously and quickly organized.
Within 20 minutes or arriving in
Glasgow, I was slipping into my dance
clothes in an old gymnasium where a
dozen people were already in motion.
Finding a spot on the side of the room,
I lay down, dropping into my weight,
my breath, enjoying a stretch, taking
time to let time decompress and sensa-
tion come forward. I could hear the
others moving around me as I took
more time to stretch and breathe,
beginning to find in my body the
deep circulation I call dancing.
Relaxing my weight further with
each exhalation, I locate the center of
the earth directly below me down
deep. In whatever city or continent,
the center of the earth is always right
there. I move on, mobilizing inside
my "skinesphere," opening channels
through my body's tissues and joints
Volume 16 1991
for the passage of movement, impulse,
energy, feeling, idea. As my kinetic
energy builds, my appetite for space
expands, first into my immediate
kinesphere then into the whole room.
Pathways through the moving ensemble
appear and I take one.
Circulating among the others now,
I'm passing them by, not yet ready to
physically engage. I'm glad to be
among them and feel a language coming
that I love to speak.
When touches meet and weight is
exchanged, two deep breaths can often
be heard. Dancing is its own land and
language and in a short time a profound
level of communication can be reached.
I loved the "conversations" I had that
day in Glasgow-from abstract philo-
sophical exchanges to detailed techni-
cal explorations, through emotional
landscapes that swelled then gave way
to some physical fun that was played
out through increasingly subtle permu-
tations and so on until the dance was
done. Leave-taking takes its own form
each time. Introductions after dancing
often seem other-worldly, as ifthe
dancing was the "real world" and our
names a familiar fiction.
I was moved that day by the net-
work. I found people tremendously
generous with their time, space and
spirit. The moving body can hold forth
on a variety of subjects, revealing how
she feels, what she sees, who she is,
what she's thinking, where she's going.
But just to be dancing, improvising,
even touching, doesn't insure that
there will be a moving experience, a
quickening of life, and not just a
pleasant physical or mental workout.
Movement forms are good vehicles,
but there's something else, some other
level of engagement that happens
within a form-a release of spirit or
perceptual vitality-that inspires inven-
tion and deepens the contact with
oneself and partners. These improvisa-
tions can feel effortless but not without
exertion-demanding discipline to stay
within the bounds of the form, courage
to veriture past them, wisdom to decide
when to, humility when your decisions
lead you astray, compassion when it
hurts, elation when it works, and inten-
tion to stay with it through it all. To
dance in this way with others is to
communicate and discuss through
touch, movement, weight, tone, and
timing, bits of the mystery that only
our bodies can describe .
Since its inception in 197 5 as the
Contact Newsletter, Contact Quarterly
has been a vehicle for the exchange of
news and views about Contact Improv-
isation among an expanding network
of movers.
The first formal discussion in the
magazine of work other than Contact
was "Dartington March" in the summer
1976 issue, where Steve Paxton talks
about Mary Fulkerson's classes in Ana-
tomical Release and David Woodberty
reviews Lulu Sweigard's book, Human
Movement Potential-Its Ideokinetic
Facilitation. Since then, CQ has had
the opportunity to follow many over-
lapping currents of new dance develop-
ment-various approaches to improvisa-
tion, Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen and
Body/Mind Centering, Ruth Zaporah's
Action Theater, Contemplative Dance,
Irene Dowd 's neuromuscular training,
several branches of "Release work,"
Authentic Movement, and the work of
many contemporary choreographers/
performers.
Next issue's focus-Dancing With
Different Populations-will bring us in
contact with new currents of moving
people, and further our dialogue with
the "disabled" community-a highly
developed network in itself. In the
issue you now hold, Tom Giebink and
David Koteen preview this focus with
writings that stem from their experiences
with "differently-abled" dancers. There
is a lot to be learned from the mingling
of these bodies of work and organiza-
tions of people. What will come of this
inspired crossfertilization remains to be
seen-in the mind and in the moving.
Nancy Stark Smith
CQ/CI Sourcebook 201
DANCING WITH THE
DIFFERENTLY-ABLED
by Tom Giebink
Empathy, an elusive word,
means ... dancing in another person's
skin? If empathy is the ultimate
form of love, then dancing contact
improvisation, too, is a form of
love.
This idea took on new meaning
for me in Eugene, Oregon at the
1991 DanceAbility workshop.
Disability is not monolithic.
Cerebral Palsy is not the same as
Multiple Sclerosis is not the same as
Paralysis due to nerve damage is not
the same as Blindness. Even within
the "category" of cerebral palsy,
one person can communicate by
speech, another by pointing at pic-
ture symbols, yet another spells
words by looking through a clear
plastic plate covered with the
alphabet while a "reader" speaks the
words the "speaker's" eye
movements have indicated. Each per-
son is affected by their disability in a
singular way, yet they are routinely
lumped together as people "who
can't get along without help" in our
(able-bodied) world. Instead, each
has struck a different balance with
the physical world, making
themselves differently-abled.
Gerry Overington, who is totally
blind, told me that I might close my
eyes but would still not enter the
world he lives in since my "mind's
eye" would still see the scene. He
does not live in a picture that's been
temporarily obscured. For him the
balance of his senses has shifted
toward attention to touch, sound,
smell, and memory.
Bruce Curtis lost the use of his
legs, and hands partially, to his
spinal cord injury at 17. Since then,
his wheelchair has become an exten-
sion of his body. (He's definitely not
"confined" by it.) If I say, "Wheels
have replaced his legs and feet," that
seems obvious yet far too simple.
202 CQ/CJ Sourcebook
Rather, his body has become dif-
ferently shaped because it integrates
his chair with his flesh and bones so
that his movement is an ever-varying
combination of the capabilities of
both.
In dancing with Bruce, I was the
one learning to move. I couldn't res-
pond in habitual ways-weight and
balance were different. For instance,
"taking weight" in an able-bodied
duet often involves supporting the
other's weight through spine, legs,
and feet. However, in one duet with
Bruce, I felt "taking weight" as a
balancing in which our arms were
like the spokes of a wheel transmit-
ting weight back and forth between
me as the hub, and him as the rim,
our weights alternately stretched
away then compressed towards each
other. Bruce might lean/ extend into
me in such a way that my weight,
anchored through the floor, would
provide a resistant center which he
could alternately push off from or be
pulled in by, creating a momentum
and continuous change of direction
that rolled his chair around me.
Gravity seemed to act horizontally as
he pivoted around me. No hands
were required to turn the wheels of
his chair, the spiraling thrust created
was the almost effortless product of
the lateral interplay of our weights.
(The image of planets orbiting each
other comes to mind.) Seen from the
outside, one might think that the
able-bodied person was always in-
itiating, but Bruce said his partner's
active weight supported him by pro-
viding a resistance he could work off
of, amplifying his initial impulses so
that his range of movement was ex-
tended. In fact, our dance was
unrestrained by his chair whether he
was moving in it or carrying the duet
out of it to the floor.
Emery Blackwell cannot walk or
feed himself. When I helped him at
the Breitenbush Jam my hands were
momentarily his: when they fed him,
while brushing his teeth, while clean-
ing up after being on the
toilet. .. standing or sitting was a
game of balance and support with
me or some well-anchored object.
Yet he bicycles 30-60 miles a day,
alone. He talks of his dance of get-
ting into and out of the bathtub,
dancing his way out of bed, into the
bathroom. He has a joy in moving
that I realize I've long given up to
the habitual shorthand of getting
from here to there in the world. He
also dances for audiences-solo, and
in a remarkable partnership with
Alito Alessi, continually dancing
through what I'd imagined to be his
limits. He bought ballet shoes for
feet which, although they will not
support his weight, have been
poetically aligned by his cerebral
palsy into a permanent en pointe
position. He is a truly graceful,
whole human.
Dancing in EMPATHY, what does
it mean? Bruce told me a story, say-
ing, "Suppose I drop a coin on the
ground. Now, it usually takes me
longer to pick it up than an
able-bodied person and it's curious
to see if someone will pick it up
before I do. There is a certain
amount of time which society allots
to a given task and if I take longer
than that I am seen to be having a
problem." He's not. Long ago he
accepted his own frame of reference.
Time has become very personal. He's
not having any trouble but able-bod-
ied people often don't see that. Their
discomfort sets in when, "it takes
him too long" and sympathetically,
sometimes with pity, the coin is pick-
ed up so that he doesn't have to
"work so hard at it." Bruce said he
does appreciate help, but it almost
always comes with that attendant in-
sistence on the able-bodied frame of
reference. Sometimes that means he's
been judged, subconsciously or not,
to be less than competent.
Perhaps he's seen to be in physical
pain? For a short while I was captive
of those feelings, even when I knew
they had no basis in fact. In my
case, the pain and fear associated
with old, and temporarily-very-disab-
ling skiing injuries were being dredg-
ed up, leading to momentary irra-
tionalities like, "He is in pain, and
unhappy. It's temporary, he'll
heal ... " Or, sometimes emotions
can link disabilities with aging and
dying (I've had a close friend and
parent die recently) and so sadness
and grief, as well as fears around the
loss of physical functioning, can in-
appropriately become attached to
disabled people. It's awkward when
Volume16 1991
photo: Rochus Schmuecker
Gerry Overington getting a ride with
Emery Blackwell in Eugene, Oregon.
the experience of the different-
ly-abled is felt through an able-bod-
ied filter, but it's not surprising. We
spend so much time and attention
dancing around our own discomfort.
So to dance in empathy is to
dance in the frame of reference of
one's differently-abled partner, mov-
ing on equal terms ... which is true
of contact improvisation in general
but now one stretches into new ter-
ritory (as Chinese or Arabic are a
much greater stretch for our English
ears and tongues than German or
Spanish).
Sometimes the contact of the im-
provisation is other than touch.
Other times conflicting touch im-
pulses are felt. Emery told me that
an able-bodied person bends an arm
by signalling muscles to contract
while simultaneously suppressing
those signals to muscles opposing
that movement, but the area of his
brain which controls the "suppres-
sion" function has been damaged by
cerebral palsy so both bending and
straightening muscles contract at the
same time. It's a standoff that he
can overcome by conscious thought
but there's often a "lag time" of 30
seconds or more which, even then, is
accompanied by the jerkiness of con-
flicting muscle messages. In dancing
Volume 16 1991
with him, I found I had a tendency
to arbitrarily choose to follow one
impulse or, conversely, none. Either
way, I was stuck in my own perspec-
tive, doing my own dance, drowning
out Emery's initiatives. Waiting with
Emery meant operating in his time,
listening for his intention to sift
through his nervous system, allowing
my senses to shift into line with his
without losing my own center. Danc-
ing with that lack of knowing was
differently-dancing, since for those
dances I was living as if all muscle
movements required conscious in-
tervention. I felt the awkwardness
like a never-ending struggle to
juggle.
Rarely have I been so conscious of
the body as the container of the
spirit. But then that's the content of
these dances: the movement of the
human spirit transcending the con-
tainer it's been given by birth or
chance. In contact improvisation,
both movers are extending through
limits, not the least of which are the
limits of empathy ... going into
another world and allowing another
into one's own. Enabling each other
to dance with those risks. *
TOM GIEBINK works as a sculptor,
painter, performer, and video artist in
Austin, Texas where he is currently
organizing a DanceAbi/ity workshop with
Mary Ganzon to take place hopefully this
coming fall. He spent 6 years on the
alpine ski race circuit until he moved to
Austin where there's no snow, but there
is Contact.
A QUESTION OF
PERFORMANCE
Some questions I brought to
the performance portion [of the
Breitenbush Jam experience in
Oregon, specifically the post-Jam
performances in Eugene] were never
addressed and are still burning a
groove in my brain. What is the
criteria for deciding to perform, and
do we have a responsibility to the
audience to give our best? I was very
happy to see that everyone who
wanted to got to perform. There was
no sense of elitism, or judging a per-
son's worthiness to perform. But I
think it would serve us all to help
each other bring what is unique and
special about us to the stage.
At 44, I think of myself more as a
mover than a dancer. 'Performance
artist' is a convenient term
nowadays. I think of a dancer as so-
meone who spends a lot of time dan-
cing, practicing, focussing on their
body as an instrument of expression.
As a performer, I try to focus on the
areas in which I can offer something
unique, something that makes a con-
tribution. For people with limited
dance training and limited contact
experience to perform in either of
these areas doesn't seem to make
sense, for sure to the audience, and
probably not for the performers. My
wife, who has a strong ballet
background, found it hard to relate
to most of the performances. She
was reminded of when she was a lit-
tle girl, and the kids on the block
would put skits together, and the
parents would watch. I guess this is
fine, if the audience feels related
enough to the performer that they
really don't care what they do; they
just love seeing their friends on
stage. What is the criteria for
deciding to perform, and do we have
a responsibility to the audience to
give our best?
Scheduling only one day [at the
end of the Breitenbush Jam] for a
Performance Conference seems an
anomaly to me. I think it would
make more sense to have the jam on
the weekend, and have the con-
ference last much longer. There was
barely enough time to figure out
what we wanted to do, and there
was little if any time to take advan-
tage of the people present who spend
their lives as performers. The range
of commitment to performing varied
greatly. Should anyone be allowed to
come to the Performance Con-
ference? It was nice to feel like we
were all kindred spirits, but the day
seemed identical to me to many im-
provisational workshops that are of-
fered to the general public. I missed
being able to pick the brains of Steve
[Paxton] and Nancy [Stark Smith]
and Alito [Alessi] and Karen
[Nelson]. It would be interesting to
know why we all came to the Perfor-
mance Conference. I have the sense
that it's partially an ego thing. I get
to go home and say I'm a per-
former, I get to make believe I'm of
the same caliber as people who focus
their lives on performing. I get to
avoid all the deeper questions, all the
demons that squelch my creative
drive the other 51 weeks of the year.
Namaste,
John William Johnson
Portland, Oregon
CQ/CI Sourcebook 2IB
Nevon Clark and Lisa Gottlieb-Clark
BIRTH DANCE
Birthing my baby boy was the essence of a contact
dance. For me, the key to a satisfying improvisational
dance means abandoning my analytic mind and embracing
the center of my intuitive self. This intuitive center grew
in size and strength through my pregnancy, and bloomed
as my labor began. I trusted my body in the dance of bir-
thing, and my body freely opened.
In this age of high-tech births, in cold, sterile hospitals,
my home birth was instead a celebration of spirit and
nature.
I danced my baby out into this world, and he danced
with me. Now, when we hold each other and move
together through our days and nights I feel the continua-
tion of our original improv on the day he was born.
Lisa Gottlieb-Clark
LISA GOTTLIEB-CLARK: "I live in Ann Arbor, Michigan with
my husband Ed, my daughter Zoey and my new baby Nevon. I
· am a visual artist, and also have a part-time body work prac-
tice."
204 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volwne 16 1991
FIRST TOUCH
by Christina Svane
It has been said that gravity is
the expression of Mother Earth's
love for her children. When I im-
agine that hug ending, I feel the hor-
ror of being lost in space, alone.
When my baby had the hiccups in-
side me, I yearned to comfort her,
but how could I hold in my arms
what I already held in my womb?
My blood in her veins, my body her
world-yet I could not say to her, "I
am here. You are not alone." That
which loves us surrounds us yet can-
not contact us; we must contact it.
Perha~s I could say that culture is
the collected effort of our species to
·;nake contact with the unseeable
totality in which we are developing.
It can not pick us up when we cry.
But its blood runs in our veins.
Sometimes, in dreams, we see what
we later will call a face.
I find it tragic that Contact Im-
provisation has so often a
therapeutic effect on a person. That
implies that everyone out there who
isn't experiencing it is probably suf-
fering. That doesn't sound quite
logical. But surely it has spread
because it answered a collective need,
quenched a collective thirst.
I have tasted my own milk and it
is sweet. I cannot remember, but I
imagine, that as a breast-sucking
newborn, I enjoyed nursing not only
Volume 16 1991
for the sweet sustenance it poured in-
to me like sunshine, but equally for
the contact improvisation. We could
call it our first conversational part-
ner, speaking and listening through
the skin of mouth, hands, arms, face
and chest, to a partner who is warm,
responsive, fluid, round and featur-
ing a special point of access. The
circle with the point in the center.
Symbol of the sun, the mother. (In
Tibetan teachings, the solar principle
is feminine-the power to ripen and
sustain life-and the lunar principle
is masculine. It was affirming to see
this interpretation.)
What effect has it had on us to
live in a society in which our most
important symbol has been deemed
obscene? I am not advocating a
"topless" society, though I see
nothing wrong with that concept, so
long as it is left up to each in-
dividual to decide. But I believe in
doing the obvious, ·or at least
recognizing it, and it is obvious that
the human body is a long way yet
from being liberated. Especially the
body of the mother, once worship-
ped, now persecuted through taboos,
harsh birth practices, a medical
establishment that discourages nurs-
ing, and ignores the fact that skin-to-
skin contact with the baby is the key
to its well-being and development.
In accepting the Nobel Prize, and
again in addressing the Italian
Government this spring, His Holiness
the Dalai Lama of Tibet reminded
his audience that every member of
photos by Janet L. Cox
the human race is born free of
religion or culture, but shares univer-
sally with all human babies the need
for affection. Physical contact with
the mother is the single most impor-
tant factor in the well-being of the
newborn for the first weeks of life,
he said. It reaffirmed my feeling that
this is the topic of the hour. If we
allow the generation being born now
to grow up with their need for con-
tact satisfied instead of scorned, the
problems of the world may be in-
herited by sane and compassionate
people who have the natural ability
to do the obvious.
I wonder how the contact com-
munity can assist in the process of
restoring to childhood the possibility
of communicating with parents or
others through touch-a language
already functioning at birth, years
before speech is perfected. Perhaps
the goal of Contact Improvisation
should be to render itself obsolete.
My hope is to stimulate dialogue
in "Still Moving" regarding the
language of touch between parent
and infant. I would like to hear ac-
counts of what you've been doing
privately and/ or publicly with this
relationship. *
CHRISTINA SV ANE was one of the
founders of Movement Research, Inc. in
NYC. She recently returned with her
newborn girl to Vermont after 2 years
teaching dance at the Theaterschool in
Amsterdam, Holland.
CQ/CI Sourcebook 205
STILL MOVING (cont'd)
On Watching "Continuing Contact"
Oberlin College Dance Company Concert
Spring, 1990
Tumbling socks ... That is what the performance of
Continuing Contact brought to mind during the concert.
The eight dancers appeared in loose white costumes and
took turns bumping each other out of duets. Have you
ever sat and watched your clean clothes rise and fall
through the spin of the drying cycle? A pair of white
socks thrown into a dark load will stand out vividly and
will look like they are tumbling alone in the dark. I can
easily unf ocus my eyes from the looping pattern and con-
centrate on the intimate movement of socks in contact
with each other. The socks wrap, roll and slide across
each other. Theirs is a continuous falling and rising.
There is no "muscling it" in this duet, the socks rise in
response to their incredible momentum. The dancers on
stage also did a duet of wrapping, falling, sliding, rising.
There was continuous motion; none of the moments of
contact resulted in weight colliding and ending in dead
stops. Nothing ever remains stationary in the dryer either.
Kim Monis
When the dancing began I was absorbed in the details;
where the point of contact was, where it was traveling
and how; placement of weight. Soon, I felt m)'self
responding in, as they call it, a kinesthetic way, feeling
physical empathy with the movement. Yet I, for the first
time so removed from the dancers, was deeply moved by
the spontaneity of their responses to each other; the in-
finite variety, and the incredible (and necessary) sensitivity
of those responses. I had not been separated enough from
it before to see the miraculousness of these movements in
terms of just daily human interaction.
SylviaChwe
Watching Contact and doing Contact are experiences
further apart than most audience/performer relationships.
Contact is like Pop Rocks. If you just watch surface ac-
tivity, it's difficult to understand what's going on. Get
Close, pay attention; maybe you'll hear it crackle. But to
really experience it, you've got to pop it in your mouth
and feel the explosions.
Betsy Cutler
-0
Qj
l
c:
..c:
..2.
@
0
0
..c:
c.
"Continuing Contact" was a performance Ann Cooper Albright directed with her students at Oberlin College, Spring 1990. Using
contact improvisation, it was danced on a proscenium stage in front of a backdrop of enlarged 'hieroglyphs'.
The performance frame in which contact improvisation
was danced in the ODC concert trivialized this movement
form. On a proscenium stage, the Continuing Contact
dancers were formally separated from the audience,
removing the personability and the three-dimensionality
available at closer viewing. Unlike a regular jam, the
dancers wore white costumes which made it difficult to
distinguish between bodies and hence watch the par-
ticulars of what one body was doing, save dancing solo,
at any particular time ... The audience found the dancing
amusing if not hilarious and I became increasingly more
uncomfortable as the people around me laughed harder.
What for me is a beautiful and moving dance form had
become a comedy act.
Chloe Stamas
206 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume16 1991
CONFESSIONS OF"A LAYMAN DANCER
Dedicated to Anyone Who Ever Danced With Me
by Barry Kirsh
Would you pass up free tickets
to an ice hockey game at the Forum
in Montreal? Seats at ice level, with
the Canadiens playing the defending
Stanley Cup Champion Calgary
Flames? I did. And my father was
baffled when I declined his invita-
tion. I'm sure he was shaking his
head at the other end of the
telephone line and wondering about
me.
Don't misunderstand. I love
hockey. But, on Wednesday nights
this autumn, I have been attending
dance classes. In fact I have been
dancing Contact Improvisation on a
once weekly basis for the better part
of 4 years now. My father, on the
other hand, has been bowling every
Tuesday night for the last 40 years.
Yet, he would grab the hockey
tickets at a moment's notice. Why
didn't I? Could it be that 'the World
of Dance' has occasioned more for
me than bowling has for my father?
Three and four years ago I
remember that the dancers talked a
lot about technique. Many of us in
Contact courses and occasional
weekerid workshops wanted to im-
prove our skills. I felt that if I could
stand on my hands and flip over
someone else's back, then I would
improve tremendously as a Contact
Dancer. Or at least be in a position
to register for a new course entitled,
"Flying," an eventual step from
Contaet Dance, I believed.
Luckily Montreal is the home of
several fine Contact Dance teachers.
Andrew Harwood, the leader in
three workshops I have attended, has
helped me. My feeble attempts to
walk on my hands were not ridicul-
ed. Instead, my immediate needs
were recognized. He suggested poetic
polarities to frame my precarious
perches. We pulled for the earth and
pushed to the sky. We differentiated
shadows amidst images of
light/dark. With weight/lightness, we
intimated the profundity of Being
and Nothingness it seemed, as I grew
into my body more fully. The poetry
did assuage my fears of disorienta-
tion. Though I still had to accept the
reality of lurching acrobatic postures
and an instinctual begging for form.
I kept on. Contact Dance became
a paradox to me. It intrigued me as
a mystical endeavour in the guise of
physical movement. It was exciting
that people around me seemed
uninhibited about their bodies. So
spiritual communication through
bodily movement became the enigma
I sought to express each time I danc-
ed. To hell with handstands! If I
could listen to the impulse, the magic
of Contact might glow in the intense
corporeal kinship on the dance floor.
It was better than erotic behavior
because it drew from many more
human emotions. And I took delight
in it.
My weekly course work with
Gurney Bolster confirmed the notion
that concentration was essential. The
long warm-ups, from the slightest
movement, gradually, into the sweep-
ing gestures of the entire body,
heating up and perspiring in solo
dance focussed my energy and
prepared me best to dance with
others. I think I wanted to become a
monk at one point. Cultivating the
meditative poise of a monk would
surely accrue the release of unfet-
tered movement. Then I went home
to my wife and kids to realize that
deliberate action often meant com-
promise. No recluse could I be.
Nevertheless, I wished to continue
my labour of love, regardless of my
certain limitations. But Gurney
became pregnant, and Andrew, like
most of the Contact teachers, taught
exclusively during the day. Spiritual
aspirations could not transcend the
realities of my daily life. I was a
layman whose feet could no longer
step into the rarefied world of dance.
Disappointed, I felt left out. I re-
bounded though. I ran. It was the
only way to move open to me. Run-
ning is movement with power and
grace and I worked on lengthening
my stride. I was also able to keep
fit. My mind, however, longed for
the concentration of dance.
This hiatus from dancing proved
to be a short one. Andrew decided
to offer an evening course in Im-
provisation. I was saved. And in
November, he offered a weekend
workshop in Contact Improvisation.
Volume 16 1991
I was in full swing once more.
The intensity of this last workshop
was refreshing; more, it was truly
creative. I was listening for the
poetic images to cleanse my mind of
disjointed details. The group
dynamic to sweep away personal in-
significance into the greater Zen
mind of truly spontaneous movement
was a beckoning goal. Yet, my ex-
perience that weekend is not readily
defined by poetic or religious im-
agery. The only word to suggest the
new experience is 'simple'.
Movement is simple when it is well
done. I discovered that simple
movements lead to other simple
movements. That kind of obvious
progression yields gravity and fluidi-
ty. A fully sensual presence, in sim-
ple dialogue with the world, occurs
in the best moments of dance.
I still can't do handstands, despite
my evolution and continuing enjoy-
ment of dance. My infrequent so-
journs in dance tempt me to stay
longer and dedicate to the discipline.
Though I'm forced to recognize a
layman's position outside the life cy-
cle of a dancer. Nonetheless, my
awareness of body as soul steadily
deepens. And that I believe is why I
baffled my father. *
BARRY KIRSH teaches high school
drama in Vancouver, B.C. where he
recently moved from Montreal.
photo: Sheri Cohen
CQ/CI Sourcebook 'lfJ7
STILL MOVING (cont'd)
CONTACT-SKIING
by Tom Giebink
If you imagine the path the Con-
tact point travels across a dancer's
body to be a continuous trail, like an
irregular ball rolling over soft clay,
embossing a bumpy curving track,
you've something of the feel for the
slope the downhill skier follows to
the bottom of the mountain. During
Contact Improvisation, the movers
alternate being "the mountain,"
sometimes very quickly ... creating a
trail, mimicking snowy terrain: over
bumps, sudden drop-offs, twisting
sharply, skittering over ice, floating
in deep powder snow. The Contact
point is the "fall-line," the shortest
path down the mountain according
to gravity but by no means the
shortest distance. The mountain sup-
ports the skier like thermal air cur-
rents do the soaring bird. Skiing is a
controlled fall. Gravity provides
momentum. Muscles are used like
those of birds, to guide rather than
propel, continually shifting the body
into elastic equilibrium between the
lifting push of air and pull of gravi-
ty. Sometimes the mountain drops
away so sharply it's all the skier can
do to react quickly and forcefully
enough to keep up with radically
fluxing terrain. Sometimes the slope
is so gentle that a wide arcing turn
requires delicate balance over edges
of skis that engrave a single curved
line in the snow.
Danger is clearly present, especial-
ly the faster you move ... because
things come at you faster. Or maybe
it's not "things," maybe it's that
space around you changes shape
faster than you can cope with that
change which prompts a survival in-
stinct that car crash survivors
describe as a near-death experience. I
know I survived a few 70 mph
downhill race crashes (no broken
bones, no sprains even!) that I
wouldn't have if time hadn't
somehow stretched out, become
elastic, enough to allow me to move
in ways that saved me from serious
injury. What happens "in the blink
of the eye" to the outside observer is
"more than enough time" to the
person inside the event. I'd name it
catastrophic awareness.
Such an uncanny state of being,
yet it can also exist outside of the
208 CQICI Sourcebook
trauma of impending injury. I found
that out during a downhill race that
has remained tatooed on my psyche,
a continual reminder of what's possi-
ble while moving. On that run, I
knew that I had "more than enough
time" to do whatever was necessary,
sometimes waiting as impatiently as
for an overdue bus lumbering, too
slowly, closer. Yet, at 50-75 mph,
my skis flapped like banana peels, a
clear indicator that a lot of ground
was being covered fast. "More than
enough time to be ready" was not
like film seen slo-motion. At race
speed, the landscape zips by as a
blur of shadowy shapes and bright
edges. It's very abstract. There's a
strong tendency to "hang back,"
trying to "hang on" each moment in
order to sort and bag it in the cor-
rect category of past experiences,
which only leaves awareness "hung
up" like a mail bag at the station as
the train hurtles by. With one's
psyche "stuck," stiff fear tries to
guide the body and a truly dangerous
situation arises. Yet during that par-
ticular downhill race each moment
was seen/sensed sharply ... no blurr-
ing, like extraordinarily fast film
shot at an unheard of shutter speed.
So many "sense photos" felt and let
go of with such quick clarity that it
was easy to deal with each moment
completely. Confusion and panic
were out of the question, so the
moving had a calm easy quickness.
My body seemed so much expand-
ed that I could touch snow twenty
yards downhill. The feeling was one
of being "present" in a lot more
space than the physical body oc-
cupied, and time had to stretch
around it like a balloon being in-
flated. "How much time does it take
to get from here to there?" makes
little sense when there's no separa-
tion between here and there ... so the
farther the "reach," the more space
encompassed by the moment. Maybe
that accounts for my sense of "more
than enough time."
Dancing Contact Improvisation
was the first time, off snow, I've
been able to approach that peculiar
state of awareness. Certainly it has
to do with unpredictability, especially
since Contact lmprov involves "two
mountains that think." The ease, or
lack of it, in dealing with the
unknown has to do, in ski racer
jargon, with the quality of "being
unweighted, or floating." Oddly,
Contact lmprov jargon describes that
sense as "giving your weight," yet
there's no contradiction. Neither
means weight as measured by a
scale, but rather an equalizing of
pressure, skier against mountain,
body to body. No matter the words,
the phrases imply a resilience in
response to the occurrence of an un-
foreseen possibility.
On the level of muscle tissue, I
think of resilience much like Steve
Paxton's description of "snap-
release" (the ability of muscle fiber
to change states, tensed vs. untensed,
quickly). A released muscle is long
and untensed; a relaxed muscle short
and untensed. The released muscle
contracts and an arm, leg, torso lifts,
twists . . . The relaxed muscle con-
tracts to resist compression, or lock
the bones in a structure. Relaxed
muscles allow gravity and momen-
tum to open joints with no work.
Released muscles shorten without
resistance. Just a few basic syllables
in the language of muscle tissue
make for novel choices of body
movement. A zillion bits (like the O's
and 1 's of computer thought) of
response taken as a whole reveal the
limits and shape of the dance.
And so the body is ready to
change shape suddenly, in unex-
pected ways. When a mogul (snow
bump) presses upward sharply, the
body has to compress quickly, absor-
bing the shape of the mountain, then
unfold as the mogul drops away, in
order to equalize the pressure of skis
against snow. Resilience allows any
choice of many how/when/where's
to be executed with an easy
Volume16 1991
quickness. However, to the un-
resilient skier a mogul is a synonym
for catapult and the one choice left
is survival in a wild ride down the
mountain.
There are patterns that make the
terrain feel familiar, yet every run is
singular, even if its the fiftieth down
that trail. Resilience seems to have to
do with paying acute attention to
idiosyncratic inconsistencies with past
experience and'using that awareness
as the impetus to act, rather than in
accord with "what you know is go-
ing to happen." Even in a slalom
course where the "gates" dictate a
tightly structured path, there are an
infinite number of lines through it.
Similarly, my most wonderful
Contact lmprov dances have revealed
that what might become routine or
habitual can be familiar and unique
all at once. Each dance seems to
create a new, big, human psyche.
Bodies link like bones, gravity the
muscle tissue connecting them, ben-
ding and twisting this larger body. It
falls apart, it falls together ... as it
steps and "catches" its momentum
on a common foot. *
TOM GIEBINK spent 6 years on the
national/international alpine ski race cir-
cuit and has found contact improv
remarkably similar in the sense of move-
ment. He works as a painter, sculptor,
video artist, and set designer in Austin,
Texas where he's currently working on an
installation and performance called "The
Anti-Gravity House."
Volume 16 1991
IN RESPONSE
STILL MOVING
It was in April '86 when I first
saw contact improvisation. Nancy
Stark Smith and Lou Danielson
Stewart were giving a demo [in
Austin, Texas] on the Friday evening
before a weekend workshop with
Nancy. I had an immediate
kinesthetic response and a sensation
of calling. I knew that my
body/mind was curious and longed
to explored this form. It wasn't until
the latter part of '87 that this prac-
tice was part of my life. I was truly
in love with it and was a little in-
credulous when some would say, "I
tried it, but it's not for me," or, "I
have a really hard time watching it."
I knew I hadn't been exposed to
another side of how people have ex-
perienced contact.
Then, in a group conversation at
the dorm during the A Cappella
workshop '89, someone brought up
how people had left the form-for
reasons other than family, other
movement forms, or some seemingly
natural reason. This piqued my
curiosity. My attention at people's
grievances during round robins,
jams, or workshops heightened, not
because I wanted to fix anything but
I just wanted to know. So, I have
really appreciated Martin Keogh's
and Kirk Andrews' "What's in the
Bag: Issues that lie in the shadow of
contact improvisation,'' ("Still Mov-
ing," CQ Vol. 15:1, Winter 90) and
Mark Pritchard's "My Rise and Fall
in Contact Improv" (CQ Vol. 15:3,
Fall 90). They have really broadened
my vocabulary of perception,
understanding, and allowance. I am
realistic enough to know that un-
criticized consensus is a sign of nar-
row vision and listening, not to men-
tion impending blocks.
Thank you everybody for the con-
tributions to "Still Moving"-for the
ones with continuing communities
and for those building ones. There
seems to be a common thread to
bridge and breach a loneliness. I am
happy to report on our own contact
group. We had our first all-day jam
this summer. [See "Newsletter" for
report.]
Mary Ganzon
Austin, Texas
I would like to comment about
Diane Elliot's article in the "Still
Moving" section-"Making Safe
Contact" /CQ Vol. 15:2,
Spring/Summer 90].
I was moved by her capacity to
put down the ongoing difficulties,
reflections, situations, conclusions,
etc. of the work. That was great,
because just recently in a workshop
in May [in Sao Paulo, Brasil) I felt
good about teaching, I mean in an
ordering way, a kind of organizing
in my mind together with people's
time or timing how to introduce con-
tact and all of its interaction with
energy, physics, dance .. , but it's still
so fragile that I'm not able to reflect
clearly, or even get at any conclu-
sion. It's like a necessary step of the
work and I'm in a very good
humour to at least recognize a subtle
change and understanding of my
teaching. Let's see: people here have
never seen the work of contact; to
feel better when putting together a
small woman with a big man or to
allow the men to be together at
another time or to let them choose
by themselves; to work only on the
floor for a few minutes or few days,
why? ... It's more intuition than
knowing. Well! Let's say it's not so
complicated, but on the other hand,
it is, otherwise I can't know where I
am, and it's hard for students to get
somewhere. I also feel that you have
to teach & practice a few movement
skills just like any language so you
have a minimum to be able to work
with and to allow the dance & prin-
ciples to come out and to develop by
themselves.
I think Elliot's right when she says
that the great thing is to create an
atmosphere for the work, (but at the
same time not to feel responsible or
guilty if things work or not), but to
create an atmosphere I need to be
calm. It means that I can be lost,
but if I'm not calm in my heart and
mind it's not easy. It's about having
love, to be in love and with love, but
love is not enough if I'm not clear
about what I want to do, to give, to
receive, to look for or NOT.
The way that she used to get her
experiences down on paper helped
me a lot. I've also appreciated her
openness and courage to put out and
share with people her fears and
angers.
Tica Lemos
Brasilia, Brasil
CQICI Sourcebook 200
SHELF
LIFE
Sharing the Dance:
Contact Improvisation and American Culture.
Cynthia J. Novack. Madison, Wisconsin: The
University of Wisconsin Press, 1990. 114 North
Murray Street, Madison, Wisconsin 53715.
Sharing the Dance, by Cynthia J. Novack, is subtitl-
ed Contact Improvisation and American Culture. She has
posed her deep investigation of contact improvisation as a
lens through which she shapes her view of American
culture from 1960 onward. She holds that we can have a
perspective on what we do in contact improvisation by
contrasting it with other political and dance phenomena
from the period, and by measuring contact history with
cycles of other cultural events which are familiar to us-
the "demise" of the 1960s counterculture, the effect of an
affluent economy turning meager, the flings of youth
leading to more measured steps.
Cynthia J. Novack is an anthropologist, dancer/chor-
eographer and teacher. With striking intelligence and pa-
tience, she writes from all these perspectives in this book.
To save you any inconvenience, I quote the blurb on
the back cover of the book: " ... The book examines the
ways in which contact improvisers (and their surrounding
communities) encoded sexuality, spontaneity, and gender
roles, as well as concepts of the self and society in their
dancing. While focusing on the changing pr_actice of con-
tact improvisation through two decades of social transfor-
mation, Novack's work incorporates the history of rock
dancing and disco, the modern and experimental dance
movements of Merce Cunningham, Anna Halprin, and
Judson Church, among others, and a variety of other
physical activities, such as martial arts, aerobics, and
~rest ling.
"Novack concludes her study with a discussion of con-
tact improvisation both as an icon of the "end of the six-
ties" and as an ongoing dance practice which continues to
demonstrate the subtle ways in which movement
represents and creates culture."
Steve Paxton
210 CQICI Sourcebook
Volurne 16 1991
Roll. Gerry Overington.
by Steve Paxton
Rolling on the floor provides a way to examine
structural forms in the body.
An example of such a form lies in the intertwining
spirals noticed in the play of left and right and forward
and back basic to normal walking.
photos by Kate Mount
Volume 16 1991
Right-left walk. Steve Paxton.
CQICI Sourcebook 211
(cont'd)
If you take a step and continue the oppositions in the
body to an extreme, you can see two spirals circling
around each other.
And if the next step is taken to an extreme, the spirals
reverse.
Left-right walk. Steve Paxton.
Right side moving around support of the left. Left side moving around support of the right.
212 CQ/Cl Sourcebook Volwne 16 1991
Helix legs. Gerry Overington.
When this form is taken to the floor the energy of the
extreme twist of the body promotes a coil which can be
rolled with no apparent effort. This is done with the
spiral initiated either at the top with the hands and arms,
or with the toes, feet, and legs at the bottom.
In these spiral rolls, a single initiation of energy flows
into the most extreme spiral the body can achieve and
the roll continues as long as the shape is maintained. The
movement stems from changes of weight inside the body
as different surfaces of the spirals are rolled upon.
The less extreme alternating helixes of walking also
permit movement initiation from different places in the
body, but in practice just a few such options are
integrated into an habitual walk. The other options wither
with disuse. Turning this basic form onto its side causes
many parts of the body to extend and take responsibility
for the roll.
Helix arms. Steve Paxton.
Volume 16 1991
CQ/CI Sourcebook 213
(cont'd)
Crescent roll: head lifted. Steve Paxton.
Head and feet lifted.
Middle lifted.
214 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Crescent rolls come in 5 varieties.
The premise: a body shaped like a
banana, arced from top to toe, and
maintaining this exterior shape
relative to gravity while rolling along
the floor. In this form the left and
right sides of the body stay closer to
parallel than in the previous spiral
form. The rolling choices are: head
lifted, head and feet lifted, middle
lifted. And two in which the whole
body is stretched along the floor:
rolling toward the points of the arc
or toward the bend of it.
These rolls are viewed as a set
because of their external form; the
coordinations for their execution are
different as the relationship of the
shape to gravity changes. The first
roll provides a good stretching for
the short muscles at the joining of
the sides of the pelvis to the upper
torso, and a good stretch for the
abdominals. The arms are used on
the floor, so great strength is not
needed in the lower back. The
second and third rolls are
outstanding whole-body toners, and
are fairly advanced work,
muscularly. The last two were
spotted in the dance works of
Simone Forti, the American
choreographer, and don't require as
much strength, but provide one of
the unusual coordination problems
in the annals of human locomotion.
Volwne 16 1991
Two moments in the 'Simone Forti' rolls. If coming forward, the roll is toward the points.
If moving backward, toward the bend.
Volume 16 1991
CQ/CI Sourcebook 215
(cont'd)
Exploring discs.
Teaching by to11ch. Gerry Overington & Steve Paxton.
This article is excerpted from a forthcoming writing by
Touchdown Dance, a project working for extended mobility for
the blind, directed by Steve Paxton and Ann Kilcoyne, Devon,
England.
216 CQJCI Sourcebook
Exploring form in these nine rolls
has several advantages. Fear of
falling does not interfere with
learning. The sensations found in the
exercise are unusual: we rarely
notice these singular forms in our
daily movement, but in these rolls
we can hardly miss the basic
forms-the helix and the turning
crescent.
These forms give the spine itself a
workout, as well as the muscles and
attachments of the spine. The point
is that there are sensations in the
body of the spine itself, in the discs.
This rather dull lot of feelings along
the length of the spine can best be
identified in the lumbar, where a
vague pinching sensation may
accompany the backbend.
Once the quality of sensation in
the spine is found, it can be noticed
in the course of the rolls. It then
begins to make new sense to speak
of 'the spine'. A prerequisite to this
discovery is relaxation, as tension
masks sensation and maintaining it
requires wasted effort. Once the
feeling in the spine has been
located, one can more accurately
stretch the circling arms through the
upper spine at the center of the
back, or align points on the spine to
discover new postures.
Sighted people start to learn these
rolls by seeing them. For those
having difficulty in translating what
they've seen into what to do, hands-
on is most useful, with verbal aids.
Blind people I work with learn the
rolls by feeling with their hands and
are further assisted by hands-on and
verbal aids. When the blind then
direct the efforts of the sighted, they
tend to teach by hand. They convey
the principles, and the sighted
person can visualize what is meant.
In teaching, one can transmit the
basic spiral forms visually, verbally,
and kinesthetically. Each of these
transmissions is effective, but touch
is the keystone of the work. *
Volume 16 1991
Volume 17 1992
EDITOR NOTE
CROSSING THE GREAT DIVIDES
The first time I experienced Ishmael
Houston-Jones's score, ''The Politics of
Dancing," was in Berlin at the 1988 Euro-
pean Contact Teachers' Conference. In his
afternoon workshop by the same name, he
asked us to imagine a railroad track run-
ning diagonally through the room from
comer to comer, dividing the room in half.
Gathering in the middle of the room upon
the invisible track, the group met for in-
structions: "All those people who have
both parents alive, form a group on the
right side of the track; all those who do not
have both parents alive, form a group on
the other side." To the image, he added a
fast approaching train and with it the need
to make a quick decision, one side or the
other, which way to go.
Once we were divided, Ishmael said,
"Look at your group." Eyes to eyes, eyes
to bodies, eyes to floor. Eyes certain, eyes
shy, eyes teary, eyes wide. After some
minutes he said, "Now tum and look at the
other group." Across the length of the stu-
dio, across the invisible track, we look at
"the others." What we see: how many of
them there are, who's there, the visual de-
sign of the group-heights, colors, postures;
mood. What we feel: anything, everything.
We are nervous, proud, curious, bored,
uncomfortable, sad, amused. It depends of
course on the categocy.
After several more minutes of looking
at the other group without talking (the
whole exercise was done in silence), we
are asked to move towards each other
slowly, to miX again in the middle and
wait for the next instruction: "All those
who were raised in a Jewish household, go
to the right side; all those who were not,
go to the other side."
Some categories were easier to respond
to than others, either because the answer
was indisputable or the subject less
charged. Sensitivities varied greatly from
person to person, and subject to subject,
whether questions of age (under 35/ not
under 35); social/sexual issues (homosexu-
al/ not homosexual; living with a mate/
not living with ... ); self-image (those who
consider themselves above-average intelli-
gence/ those who do not consider them-
selves ... ); money (those who make above
$20,000 a year/ those who do not ... );
politics (those who voted in the last
election ... ).
As I remember, we basically stuck to
the score in Berlin. There was, however,
always recourse in interpretation: some
people decided to lie, or at least play "the
facts" in their own way; other people ago-
nized over every decision, tcying to be
Volume 17 1992
absolutely honest: did having had an abor-
tion place you with ''those who have had
children" or "those who have not"?; and
then there were people who chose to get
run over by the train rather than make an
impossible decision or acknowledge an
unacceptable categorization.
''The Politics of Dancing" came back
around last summer when it was led by
Daniel Lepkoff, an old friend and former
CQllaborator of Ishmael's, as part of a
"group morning" at the A Cappella Motion
workshop in Northampton, Mass. The
exercise was conducted, as before, in a
very straight-forward manner-the instruc-
tions simple and clear, the categories rang-
ing from mildly to extremely sensitive.
This time, the response was stronger than I
remembered: more soul searching, people
crying, and more people choosing to stay
on the track, even for questions like "those
who are women on this side, those who are
not women on the other side." Gradually,
new spacial categories of response were
invented as people placed themselves in
the room on a continuum between the two
extremes, until on some questions the
group was completely scattered.from one
end of the room to the other rather than
divided into two distinct groups. Emotions
ran high, bonding among participants
strong, and by the end we were all a bit
dazed.
I remember going through a range of
emotions as the categories came and went
and I dutifully plumbed my depths for the
truest answers. Among my feelings were
suspicion and irritation, as I wondered
what made this The Politics of Dancing,
what this had to do with dancing at all,
and what it had to do with me. I went
away from the exercise stirred up and
confused, my consciousness obviously
raised, or at least on edge.
I am remindoo by this writing that I
have always loved facts about people. I
often like to ask workshop participants for
a fact about themselves. Anything: I ate
an English muffin this morning; I like to
play golf; I'm grieving the death of my
boyfriend; I learned something new about
leverage in my last dance. I don't exactly
know what it is about these details, the
particulars of their lives, that moves me. I
do know they add a dimension that wasn't
there before.
And what exactly did we mean by an
issue of CQ about "dancing with different
populations"? What does "different"
mean? If Ishmael had said, "All those who
are different go to this side, all those who
are not different go to the other side" who
would have gone where and why?
Common denominators among people
are many, yet differences remain. They
help to distinguish one thing from another,
provide contrast, and with it, dimension.
Using movement to communicate across
boundaries-cultural, age, experience, gen-
der, etc.-is a challenge that can teach us a
great deal, about ourselves, each other, the
nature of nature, and the power and com-
plexity of the language of movement.
Overcoming prejudice, ignorance, and fear
through dancing 'with "other" people is
awkward, outrageous, liberating and can be
quite a lot of fun.
There seems to be a first flush (does it
continue?) that accompanies this opening
to another person, where the reservoir of
human compassion and humor is tapped
and we are deeply moved by an unimpeded
flow of-is it love?-to someone once dis-
tanced from us by definitions and circum-
stance. At these moments we might feel
we are truly dancing beyond ourselves.
I honor and have felt this effusion and
glow. And now I wonder what will hap-
pen next, as the novelty of crossing borders
gives way to other curiosities aroused once
inside the new territocy. What will be
found as we continue to make our way
through this complex world, deciding to
tum right or left, following our instincts
and desires into the dancing we love the
most?
Nancy Stark Smith
CQ/CI Sourcebook Zl.7
GIANT STEPS
Contacting Children with Neuro-lntegrative Dysfunction
Judy Stone
From September 1989 until June
1990, I taught contact improvisation at
Giant Steps, the Canadian Institute for
Neuro-lntegrative Development. This
Montreal school is known throughout
North America for its innovative ap-
proach. The director, Darlene Beringer,
is open to many new ideas and was
daring enough to include contact dance
as part of the school curriculum. To this
end, Ms. Beringer assembled a team of
three experienced contact dancers: Ian
Talbot, who had been working at the
school for several years, Marie-Renee
Tremblay, and myself, Judy Stone. In
December, Ian was obligated to leave
because of other commitments, and he
was replaced by Fiona Meyer.
Giant Steps services children between
the ages of 4 and 13 with developmental
delay, sensory and motor dysfunction,
aphasia, autism, apraxia, genetic disor-
ders and specific syndromes.
Techniques of synchronization and
neuro-integrative patterning used in mu-
sic therapy and occupational therapy
form the basis of the school's approach.
Ms. Beringer recognized that contact
improvisation uses both vestibular move-
ment patterns and proprioception within
an improvised context that is readily
adaptable to individual needs and
abilities.
We began by establishing a rapport
with our students using massage, manip-
ulation and simple weight exchanges.
For the first few weeks we paired each
child with an adult As the months
passed and comfort levels increased, the
children worked with each other more
and more. Our sessions were structured
much like an adult's contact class with a
warm-up followed by directed exercises
around a theme (falling, rolling, support-
ing weight, following a point of contact),
then dancing (duets, round robins, solos),
and ending with a warm down.
Sixty children came to us in groups
numbering from three to nine. Each
group had very different abilities and we
adapted the classes accordingly. Two
adults would demonstrate an exercise
while the children watched. Some were
aided by our simultaneous verbal de-
scriptions while others could imitate our
actions without necessarily understanding
our words. Levels of verbal and physical
prompting that were necessary also
varied immensely.
There were enthusiastic students who
quickly took the exercises and made
them into their own dances with intriguing
variations. Even the children who need-
ed to be guided through each step ap-
peared to enjoy the new movement sen-
sations. Many children responded to
concrete imagery. We gave names and
a little story to each exercise (see exam-
ples). When we began to have round
robins, children would at times lose focus
and we would use the names of exercis-
es as anchors to recall their attention to
the dance. "Look at Emilie, she's being
a rock. How can you dance with that
rock?" "It looks like Francois is being a
house. Can you be a snake and slither
through his house?" These movement
suggestions helped to overcome the
impasses of short attention spans, moti-
vational lapses or perceptual disorgan-
ization.
Everyone involved in our dance pro-
gram was surprised and delighted by the
progress which the students made.
Children who were initially quite tactile-
phobic began to relish the physical con-
tact that they received in our class.
Passive or withdrawn children were soon
initiating contact and by the end of the
year joyous dances filled with mutual
respect and recognition developed be-
tween children who had previously shown
little interest in each other.
I myself was amazed at the wide vari-
ety of positive learning experiences that
came about through introducing the
children to contact improvisation. This
dance form has been an incredibly effec-
tive tool in reaching these sometimes
unreachable children.
A SAMPLE OF EXERCIS~
THE ROCK
One child would be the support, or
"rock," on hands and knees. Her partner
would find various ways to give weight.
We would offer suggestions such as:
sitting or lying on the rock; sliding off the
rock; being snow melting on the rock;
finding various ways to be on or near the
rock as it moved about the room; finding
ways to be supported by two rocks;
somersaulting from a rock then crawling
underneath your partner to become the
support for her.
Exercises would usually be introduced
with an adult partner, the adult in this
case being first the rock, then the weight
giver. When the children became com-
forta.ble giving and taking weight they
would then work with each other.
Judy Stone with students at Giant Steps.
218 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume17 1992
FOOT DANCE BRIDGES WITH
SNAKES
We did dances with different body
parts. Foot dances were a favorite that
children at any level could do. Snakes
would slither under a roomful of wavering
bridges.
THE RAIN MASSAGE
Fingers and loose fists were gentle
raindrops falling on the backs of children
resting on the floor. The teachers in the
school who gave so much to the children
were pleasantly surprised to be receiving
relaxing massages from their charges.
The children also enjoyed massaging
each other.
THE CHAIR
One child lies on their back, knees
over chest, feet up, forming a chair which
gently pushes into the air anyone daring
enough to sit upon it. Variations: leaning
against the chair with different body
parts. This exercise brought smiles to
the often impassive faces of severely
autistic children.
THE MONKEY IN THE TREE
A monkey climbs a human tree in
search of imaginary bananas. Many
earthbound children were motivated to
climb to unexpected heights.
THE HOUSE
Several children join together forming
a multi-level structure. Others take tums
entering, exiting and otherwise exploring
the house.*
If you have any questions or would like to
share your work with us please write or call:
Judy Stone, 4039 Des Erables, Montreal, PQ,
H2K 3V7, Canada; (514) 524-0280.
Volume 17 1992
A CONTACT PROJECT WITH YOUNG CHILDREN
Lauren Shapiro Raker
Improvisation is the most natural
form of movement for the young child
who is beginning to dance. They move
freely through suggestions of various
images ... readily becoming the "butterfly,"
"cloud," or "tiger" that is suggested.
Throughout my twenty years of teaching
experience with young children, I have
employed improvisation as a method to
enhance the children's modes of expres-
sion. Although they occasionally made
contact with another student (partner)
during the course of an exercise, it often
seemed uncomfortable, or took on the
appearance of social dance styles. The
movement then became more contrived
and less free.
Five years ago, I began to introduce
contact improvisation to the children. We
began gradually with very specific rules.
What evolved were some very elaborate
and interesting shapes, which we dubbed
"Pretzel" dances. The children loved the
procedure as well as the results. We
have continued to evolve these dances
over the years by adding and eliminating
the rules of design.
In the most basic form, a group of
youngsters takes independent space on
the floor. They must be close enough to
the other students to touch them. Upon
hearing certain musical cues, i.e., the
beat of a drum, they must contact a
neighbor with any one part of their body.
Upon hearing the second cue, they make
contact with another child or the original
child using a differen' part of their body.
This method continues until the children
are entwined in an elaborate design.
The design usually breaks apart with a
final musical cue (i.e., the ping of a trian-
gle), and then the group is ready to begin
a new design. Very often when I watch
their pieces evolve, it seems that I am
viewing them through a giant kaleido-
scope.
Recently we attempted a new version
of our contact "game." I decided to ex-
plore the use of a basic notation method.
A pattern might be written like this:
START: 1, 2, 3, ... 1, 4, 3, ... 2, 0, 2, END.
These numbers indicated how many
parts of their bodies should make contact
with another dancer or dancers. By
writing this series of numbers on the wall,
the children viewed them as they moved.
The contacts flowed more smoothly, and
the transitions occurred at the individual
pace of each child. They no longer only
made contact at the specific beat of a
drum. The results were less entangled
and intertwined, but far more interesting
and sophisticated.
The final step of these contact projects
at this point, has been to add our own
music. Using simple percussion instru-
ments, the children take turns being the
musicians and the dancers.
Although there seems to be a rigid
formality to the method, it appears to
have captured even the most reluctant
and inhibited of the children to participate
in the creation of joyful and creative
design.*
Students in Contact Project at Town School, NYC.
CQ/CI Sourcebook 219
from England - touchdown Dance reports on
A COMMON SENSE
Gerry, totally blind, lifts Sharon. Gerry thoroughly enjoys contact improvisation and
provides as excellent example of unwavering concentration on touch-'touch
density'-for sighted partners.
220 CQICI Sourcebook
by Anne Kilcoyne & Steve Paxton
Peter is big and burly and in his
fifties. He has virtually no sight. having
been badly injured in a traffic accident
His sight loss was instantaneous and
irreversible. He could no longer work
at his trade; he no longer had an income
and he felt very depressed He came to
the contact improvisation workshop with
some trepidation-he was not "artsy
craftsy" and thought dancers were a
peculiar and probably effeminate breed
However, he thought he would give it a
chance as a friend of his had spoken
very warmly about the workshop.
Having been athletic and interested in
sports when he was sighted, he experi-
enced no difficulty with the work. Over
the five days, he began to enjoy himself,
giving and receiving massage and learn-
ing to build up the skills that are basic
to contact improvisation.
Towards the end of the workshop
Peter was asked to contribute to some
video-based research. At the start of the
workshop, blind participants had been
recorded walking the length of a gymna-
sium, finding a chair, sitting on it. and
rising from it They were asked to go
through the same exercise at the end of
the workshop; thus we are able to re-
cord objective changes in posture and
gait
Peter had in fact missed the initial
session as he had joined the workshop
late. He is a very humorous man, and
realising the reasons behind the exercise
he treated us to his version of a "bad
walk" as he put it What he gave was a
hilarious Chaplinesque performance of
the exercise: holding his cane ahead of
him, he stumbled his way forward
through the vast dark territory of the
unseen gym, the blind cane then became
a fencing sword and he fought his way
through a duel with an imaginary foe.
Victorious, his stick transformed into a
horse which he sat astride and whipped
into a gallop to the far end of the gym.
Turning, he lurched drunkenly back
towards the chair which he could not
see but sensed the position of. Having
reached it. he failed to sit on it. somer-
saulting his way through falls; and ulti-
mately, threading his cane through the
Volume 17 1992
back of the chair and hoisting i~ aloft
over his shoulders, he trudged off into
the proverbial sunset. Peter had found
improvisation and performance.
When the workshop finished Peter
broke down and wept with deep grief.
It was the first time since his accident,
several years before, that he had cried.
His tears were not only for his loss of
sight but also tears of appreciation at
having found a new level of experience.
This experience opened up the future
for him. He has since entered the Royal
National College, in Hereford, England
and qualified to become a masseur. He
has found direction and now expects to
combine his new-found skills in mas-
sage with his old interests in sports and
sports injuries.
Peter is one of many blind people
who have come to contact improvisation
workshops that we have developed in
England over the last five years. These
workshops are designed to extend the
movement vocabulary and creative
experience of the visually challenged
and the professionals that work with
them. The blind who have danced with
us come from all walks of life. Some
have been blind from birth, others have
lost their sight in adulthood through
degenerative diseases, accidents and
diabetes. The professionals include
social workers, recreation officers,
teachers and dancers who work to make
dance accessible to disabled people;
most of the professionals are sighted but
a few of them are visually impaired.
If you are born without sight there are
profound implications for your physical
development as well as your social and
intellectual/cultural life. The blind
person is inhibited from freely moving
from one place to another by the fear of
falling over or bumping into things and
by a confusion in spatial orientation.
Those who are congenitally blind spend
much of their lives at home, sitting or
lying down. The paucity of the every-
day movements of walking, sitting down
and getting up means that the muscles
in their feet and legs do not develop
their potential. Through lack of use,
their muscles are underdeveloped, flac-
cid and poorly toned. These character-
istics are also reflected in posture; the
torso is often limp, the head hanging
forward. The essential movement needs
of the body are often met by a gently
repetitive rocking motion in the seated
Volume 17 1992
position. This rocking is generally
discouraged by family and professionals
as it is considered to be a 'blind-
ism '-i.e., a movement or gesture which
is not found in the sighted world and
which is seen as a stigma.
In those people who have seen for
some years but lost their sight in adult
life there is another set of bodily re-
sponses. These people do not generally
exhibit blindisms. Their gestural vocab-
ulary is consonant with that of the dom-
inant sighted culture, but their loss of
sight prohibits normal everyday move-
ment. The trauma and anxiety which
accompanies visual loss is reflected in a
chronic level of muscular tension which
is so habitual as to make muscular
relaxation a forgotten experience. they,
too, stand and wait for someone with
sight to guide them to another seat in
another room where they can safely
'park' their bodies.
Although there are some programmes
of physical education available to the
blind these are mostly purely functional
and often mechanised. For example,
there is tandem cycling, or jogging a
course that is marked out by a rope
which the blind person can hold onto, or
the treadmill or weight lifting machines
that are available in a modern gym.
Whilst a few of the visually impaired
make great efforts to keep themselves in
trim by going to the gym, they generally
report a sense of boredom with the
repetitive and socially isolated nature of
many of the exercise regimes open to
them.
Contact improvisation seemed an
ideal activity for the blind, based as it is
in the ·natural physics of movement, in
human communication, and focused on
a touch-based learning path rather than
a 'seeing and copying' mode endemic in
so many dance classes.
The inherently democratic nature of
contact improvisation makes it a particu-
larly good form for the so-called dis-
abled who deal continuously with dis-
abling social attitudes and relationships.
For example, Janee, who is partially
sighted, had left the workshop with
Rose, a sighted arts worker. They were
sitting in a car at a petrol station when
Rose was approached by a lady who
Anne traces the pathway on Peter, from sacrum, under shoulders, underneath arms
to the little linger. Sitting allows one to feel the sitzbones. Carollne (l.), is ·
extending ring and small lingers, feeling the connection from center-of-weight
(pelvis) along the same path. Peter's hands don't grasp the thought of extension
here.
CQICI Sourcebook .2Zl
]Letter from a Touchdown Dance
workshop participant
Dear Anne,
I will try to be articulate about my
perceptions of the Contact Dance work-
shop I attended in the spring, though I
don't consider putting thoughts into
words to be my natural way of express-
ing myself.
The workshop seems to have had quite
a profound effect on me, and perhaps
you will forgive me for starting by de-
scribing some of its after-effects.
For a few days I felt quite out of tune
with friends and acquaintances. I just
wanted to withdraw and relive the expe-
rience, and one of the first things I did
was to get out my sketch pad and draw
a complete sequence of all the move-
ments and partnerships I learned in the
workshop; I found that I had remem-
bered every single one vividly.
When I got to bed, at peace and very
relaxed, I had two strange experiences,
which I suppose were sort of dreams.
I was aware that I was lying inert in
the dark. I began to feel as though my
head was being gently drawn away from
my body; as though some kind of mag-
netic force was attracting me, and the
pull came first from one direction and
then another. The sensation was similar
to that which we did during the head
massage exercise and I felt very elated,
but was aware that the force controlling
this sensation was not human. I wasn't
afraid at this point, and the sensation
then faded and the sequence changed.
I was aware of standing in a bare
room with white walls. I was only con-
scious of my body from the waist up.
While standing in the same spot my body
started to make a circular movement
from the waist. As I did this I began to
get the same feeling as before; that a
magnetic force was drawing me upwards
by the head. I felt myself rising upwards
gaining speed and I could see the ceiling
getting closer. I remember feeling
slightly afraid at this point because I
wasn't quite in control and I thought I
might hit the ceiling, but I didn't, and
just floated round and round the edges
of the room as though on the end of a
222 CQ/CJ Sourcebook
piece of elastic, til the intensity of the
sensation woke me up.
This experience was all the more un-
usual for me because I am not religious;
haven't done any form of meditation;
hadn't had any alcohol and wasn't high
on anything.
It's only happened on that one occa-
sion so far and I would like to find out if
other people who've done the workshops
have had any kind of after-effects like
this?
There may be a connection between
this experience and a discovery I made
some years ago while undergoing some
formal mobility training with the long
cane, under blindfold. Much to my
instructor's bewilderment, I found that I
could sense objects from between 25 to
50 yards away without making contact
with the long cane. I did this without
sight or sound cues. I just felt a strong
sense of claustrophobia when there were
solid objects in front of me, and relief
and elation when there were wide open
spaces. Since my mobility instructor's
objective was to teach me to detect ob-
stacles with the cane, he was rather
skeptical of this ability, and set me many
challenges. He hadn't encountered this
in other clients, but did reveal that a
similar thing was referred to as a rare
phenomenon in his profession, and was
known as "Shadow Sound."
I disagree with this description: I
don't think it is a "rare phenomenon" ;
nor has it got anything to do with
"sound." I think it has more to do with
a primitive instinct for self-preservation
and dealing with the unknown, which is
dormant in most people, and only comes
into play when they are deprived of one
of the other senses.
Anyway, I return to my observations
about the workshop.
An element of the workshop that ap-
pealed to me was that the only "props"
we needed were human partnerships.
Through the variety of exercises and
partnerships I was involved in during the
workshop, I was able to initiate more
ambitious shapes and movements, confi-
dent that I would get the support to
carry them through as well as anticipat-
ing and supporting my partner's inten-
tions.
I think the basic structure of the work-
shop was sound, and there were only
two instances where I experienced diffi-
culty; though both of these were resolved
during the five day period.
The first was trying to respond, from
the perspective of a person with visual
impairment, to the mainly sighted imag-
ery used to describe some of the shapes
we were attempting to create, e.g., I
didn't understand Steve's reference to "a
double helix," which we were supposed
to achieve when we were doing the
rolling exercise. As I suggested at the
time, verbal description is necessary, but
could be more effective if it referred to
familiar tangible objects. (I have since
found that I have a sea shell which is
eroded by the sand, and forms the exact
shape I was trying to make.) I think this
point is important as I don't want to be
in positions where I have to rely too
heavily on a sighted partner's interpreta-
tion.
The second occasion I experienced
difficulty occurred when one of my sight-
ed partners matched me up with a visu-
ally impaired person for the next se-
quence in the workshop. I found that I
couldn't get any rapport or positive
contact going. This did shatter my con-
fidence for the rest of the session that
day, and although I did manage to re-
solve the issue with the person who
initiated it later, perhaps it might have
been avoided if the basic ground rules
were spelled out more explicitly at the
beginning of the workshop.
I enjoyed and benefited from the ex-
pertise of the professional sighted danc-
ers; and certainly didn't feel at all intim-
idated by their experience. In fact I
think it is proof of the effectiveness of
the work that both sighted and visually
impaired participants were in a recipro-
cal learning situation.
Finally, one last comment. I recently
read an article in the New Beacon about
Amici (a dance group working with peo-
ple who have a wide range of both phys-
ical and mental disabilities). I hope that
"Touchdown" doesn't go down this
road. The general public has two per-
sistent, and prejudicial stereotypes about
visual impairment; we are either genius-
es, or mentally retarded. I think mixing
disabilities as Amici does, often coefr.rms
rather than banishes the second stereo-
type in particular. I for one, don't want
any involvement in such an exercise.
Well, I hope all these comments will
be of some help to you. The fact that I
have written at such length ~s quite
unlike me, and you may take it as a
token of my enthusiasm and commitment
to Contact Dance.
Sincerely,
Megan Hughes
3117191
Volume 17 1992
(cont'd)
was collecting for charity. "How old is
she," the lady asked Rose a8suining that
because Janee is blind she must also be
deaf and possibly intellectually retarded.
Janee answered her. "I am 24." The
woman continued to ignore her whilst
focussing on her. "Can't they do any-
thing for her," she persisted. "It's a
terrible shame... Still, labradors are
lovely dogs."
Even Fred Raffle, a man who has
risen to the top in the field of blind
education, and who was blind from
birth, revealed that sighted co-profes-
sionals could not stop their caring role.
This means that even though be is the
boss, he has to deal with paternalistic
attitudes which infantalise, patronise and
stigmatise. In the workshops however,
he found the politics more nearly equal,
feeling that through the contact improvi-
sation structures, he was met as himself,
rather than as a person with a disability.
The workshops which we have devel-
oped are always "integrated" in the
sense that they include both sighted and
blind people who work in an equal
partnership as they learn contact impro-
visation together. -
A class in contact improvisation for
sighted people involves ''pre-tuning" the
senses from the normal sighted domi-
nance to the sense of touch. In an
integrated class this occurs very con-
sciously because of empathy with a
blind partner. It can be an intense expe-
rience to assume a state of mind in
which the visual world plays no part at
all in the reference systems. This shock
is a most salutary one, giving a high
contrast to the differences between one
sense, vision, and the other, touch.
Usually the transition from the vistlal-
ly dominant world into the world of
touch is gradual, and the sighted student
senses the change less acutely than
when dancing with the blind. We have
seen students who resisted any empathic
connection however, leaving a dance
with a blind partner who then had to
stand in place waiting for aid. Or the
student who was so inattentive that after
a two week workshop, when asked to
run an exercise for the group, she real-
ized that she didn't know how to refer
to the blind group. In a loud aside to
Anne, she said, "What do you call
them?"
She had missed the point and the
opportunity of the workshop. The peo-
ple who have lost their sight have an
increased concentration in the other
senses, and working with a blind partner
is an education in touch 'density'.
Concentration of sighted students will
waver between touch and vision. The
concentration of the blind will not
waver.
Transmitting the principles of an
exercise to the class can be taxing. To
further the democratic ideal one at-
tempts to describe the positions in a
way that both populations can under-
stand. Even though an obvious point of
integration is for the visually able to see
the demonstration, to facilitate transmis-
sion so that each of the blind can have
an example from which to learn by
touch, at the same time, one strives to
present careful, clear pictures in the
language. It is astonishing how quickly
Tony, the visually impaired partner, traces the same pathway while sighted partner
does spiral roll (see "Helix" in ca last issue). No parson in Touchdown goes
untaught, untouched, even Anne and I. This reciprocity is informative and regularly
reverses the teacher-student heirarchy. Integration, reciprocity, intimacy, physical
care are the basis for Touchdown Dance workshops.
Volume 17 1992
CQICI Sourcebook 223
In order to form a circle, touch is used. This creates physical intimacy and warms
conversation. Those with partial or total vision are blindfolded.
the language itself flounders, however.
We have a personal reference sys-
tem-'right and left', and the more ob-
jective 'north and south' or other exter-
nal references. For the blind the most
important of these is the personal sort of
reference. If everyone is facing the
same direction and reacting at the same
time, then instructions go well. When
things get a little chaotic, we've found
that overly-general directions result in a
number of different interpretations
which, if not corrected, can lead to
confusion and loss of confidence. Even
when they are corrected, the time spent
and tone of voice may feel overly tech-
nical. This taught us to use methodical
steps, careful verbal introductions to any
exercise, coupled with an attempt at a
casual, conversational air.
For those who have no movement
training and poor muscle tone, the phys-
ical approach has to be clear and soft.
This has called for an analysis of exer-
cises to try to determine what exactly is
suitable in this situation. The propor-
tions and durations of things have to be
224 CQ;O Sourcebook
considered. Relaxation and massage are
brought in frequently. Exercises requir-
ing just one part of the body to relax in
isolation, such as 'floating the head' or
'arm drop', are very useful. Exercises
which can strengthen longer connections
between limbs and torso are used.
Apparently the real juice of the work-
shops which include the blind is the
contact improvisation itself. It is this
which produces the feelings of self-
empowerment, joy and satisfaction.
There are deeply felt, difficult emotions
and painful social configurations which
accompany the loss of a person's sight;
however, our working contract is physi-
cal rather than psychotherapeutic. In
these workshops, as in all other contact
improvisation sessions, the teaching
focuses on the issues of weight, mass,
gravity, leverage and movement design.
In the teaching, we acknowledge con-
nections between emotions and muscular
tensions, but formal space for the ex-
pression of emotions is reserved for the
closing process of the workshops.
Peter's catharsis was the most extreme
that we have seen and occurred within
the formal structuring of the closing
phase.
Although many others have moist
eyes and sometimes tears, the most fully
and frequently expressed feelings are
overwhelmingly positive. Objectively
we can see that the emotional landscape
is accompanied by a changed physi-
cality-improved complexions, relaxed
features, lowered shoulders, alert pos-
ture, more confident gait and increased
animation. The participants' own im-
provisations have provided the means
whereby these changes have taken
place.*
Touchdown Dance integrates visually im-
paired and visually able (usually dancers
and blind-care professionals) folk in Devon,
England. For information: Touchdown
Dance, Anne Kilcoyne, 34 Bridgetown Rd.,
Totnes, Devon, England TQ7 5AD.
Volume 17 1992
STILL MOVING
BABY CONT~CT
by Sandra Jamrog
I am a Childbirth/Parent Educator
and a Teacher of Body-Mind Center-
ingTM. One of the aspects of my work
is helping babies and parents "bond."
I feel Baby Contact is a perfect way to
help parents attune with their babies.
I have been experimenting with
Baby Contact since my thirteen year
old daughter Jenny was born. During
the summer of '77 I was working at
the School for Body-Mind Centering™
and was fortunate to have had some
colleagues invite me to join in some
Contact Improvisation. I was fasci-
nated. I was pregnant for the third
time and had danced and performed
through all my pregnancies. Doing
Contact Improvisation while I was
pregnant felt like a trio (me, the fetus,
and the other adult).
In addition to exploring BMC and
Contact Improvisation, I was also dis-
covering the Kestenberg work, a meth-
od of observing movement and work-
ing with child/parent movement inter-
actions. Influenced by these three
bodies of work, I was experimenting
with dialoguing with the fetus in all
sorts of ways: moving in the same
rhythms that the fetus within me was
moving; initiating the movement;
following the fetal movements; leading
from the uterus; vibrating the amniotic
fluid with sound and movement; let-
ting the weight of the uterus or the
fetus adjust my relationship with grav-
ity; as well as anything else that hap-
pened as a result of the continually
changing dialogue within my body.
After Jenny was born, the natural
continuation was to keep dancing, with
her on my body, using the same dia-
logue-sometimes following, sometimes
leading; two energies creating one
ever-changing form, contacting each
other through movement and stillness.
My Baby/Parent group began exper-
imenting with Baby Contact, first the
parent lying and breathing with their
baby, just listening to their baby; then
feeling their baby initiate movement,
then responding in micro-movements
to their baby's movement initiation.
We began very gently and very care-
fully, combining initiating movement
and responding to movement, moving
and receiving, being motor and senso-
ry. Eventually we built the micro-
movements into larger movements that
moved through space. With Contact
one needs to be constantly feeling and
re-evaluating, ready to instantaneously
respond as well as instantaneously act;
one needs to be open to receiving as
well as giving; responding as well as
initiating. That balance of give and
take, in and out, is an important attrib-
ute for parents as well as babies.
In addition, in Baby Contact, babies
have the power to move the environ-
ment, of initiating movement through
space, of being responded to physical-
ly, of initiating change. They also
have the experience of incorporating
another person's rhythm, of internaliz-
ing another person's movement and
perhaps even developing it. They also
have the opportunity to see the world
from many spacial perspectives, stimu-
lating their vestibular system.
My students and I have enjoyed
Baby Contact and have learned things
we could have learned in no other
way. We have had.the opportunity to
blend our adult bodies with our
babies' bodies into one movement.*
Baby Contact.
photo: Sandra Jamrog
Volume 17 1992
CQICI Sourcebook 225
DANCES WITH WHEELS was the name of a weekend
movement workshop that occurred last May in Seattle, Washing-
ton. Organized by Charlene Curtiss of Light Motion and Whistle-
Stop Theater, Dances With Wheels brought together about 35
people of varying abilities to learn and practice contact improvi-
sation under the guidance of Alan Ptashek and Bruce Curtis of
The Exposed to Gravity Project from Berkeley. The workshop
ended with a series of perfonnances, opening into a "jam" for the
workshop participants, all of which was enthusiastically observed
by the audience.
1J
:::r::
§
en
~
0
)>
z
)>
Bruce Curlis and
Workshop Participant
~
:::r::
c
m
:IJ
:::r::
0
i:::i
N lsOn and Charlene Curtiss.
Karen e
226 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Volume 17 1992
Climbing into Charlene's chair, shaking with the unsureness of
my sudden new relationship to the ground, I had to figure out how to make
these two big wheels my friends. Charlene had adjusted her chair to make
it more maneuverable for dancing, and consequently extremely tippy. There
were now two unpredictable wheels deciding my motion. I felt completely out
of control. To sit up meant risking falling directly backwards, propelling my-
self forward meant risking a spill also. I was momentarily paralyzed Vel}'
slowly I began to find motion that did not threaten to unbalance me. J Jeamed
to find that teetering point, sort of like treading water. where you're hovering
between falling backwards and sitting straight up. Still shaking, I gradually
found a little more confidence.
I had put myself in a position that was vel}' foreign and where it took a lot
of effort to make myself comfortable. As an able-bodied person in an •able-body
oriented" world I don't have to do this vel}' often. I found myself feeling se/f-
conscious and clutzy. This experience has become a strong physical memo/}'
and a good reminder of the constant struggle to understand each other, our
differences, and to dispel any assumptions relating to these.
d oana Liesegang
sarah Wright an
Volume 17 1992
CQICI Sourcebook 'ZZJ
STILL MOVING
CAN CONTACT BE WHAT IT IS?
by Rick Knowlton
excerpt from a two-part essay
Perhaps Contact Improvisation
first arose as a neat idea rooted in the
experimental, freedom-loving '60s,
catalyzed in 1972 by Steve Paxton as a
situational structure for spontaneous
performance. Perhaps Contact is a
recreation or a choreographer's tool or
a means of therapy with difficult-to-
reach populations.
But to me, Contact is a key to
accessing a whole realm of human
interaction that most people would not
otherwise ever reach. A context in
which movement therapies can inte-
grate, chronic social attitudes can
relax, the rigid can become spontan-
eous, the playful can celebrate, the
skin's hunger can be fed.
There are so many states of body
and mind, qualities and depths of
touch, invitations for spirit to embody
the flesh which I can't imagine occur-
ring so naturally in any other con-
text... Consider, for instance:
11 In Contact Quarterly we often
read about dances with alter-abled
(i.e., "disabled") people. I'm thinking
also about the emotional and relation-
ship disabilities of "able-bodied" peo-
ple-emotional limitations rooted in or
augmented by physical habits and
rigidities. Do our Contact studies
consciously span the gap between
people of vastly different tempera-
ments?
Iii In therapeutic contexts, this
movement form can quite literally em-
body the Gestalt therapy model of
"psychological events occuring at the
boundary of the organism," (Fritz
Perls, The Gestalt Approach). Can our
work in Contact approach the more
profound boundary problems in our
society such as dysfunctional family
dynamics, abuse victims, sadomaso-
chistic disorders?
Rick Knowlton & Barry Hynum.
11111 Early in this century, F.M.
Alexander pioneered what have now
become schools of body/mind repat-
teming/re-education, on the premise
that we, as a society, incorrectly inter-
pret our nervous system's kinesthetic
information. Is there any better
ground for constant kinesthetic feed-
back, any better place to relearn and
re-evaluate our kinesthetic/proprio-
ceptive perception than the Contact
duet?
11 Contact Improvisation enjoys a
fun, multifaceted, international com-
munity of practitioners. There is
something special about a community
in which you can really touch every-
body. Now, what community wouldn't
benefit from such a direct invitation to
support and empathy? It may seem
silly to picture the executive board of
I.B.M. upside-down in sweatpants, but
what are the actual limitations keeping
Contact contained as a special interest
of us few?
11 Finally, we are just about to
see the first generation of adult chil-
dren of Contact dancers. Are they just
regular kids whose parents have a
weird hobby-or have they been ex-
posed to a world of free energetic flow
barely dreamed of by the likes of
Wilhelm Reich?
Ill If not, why not?
I'm writing perhaps not so much of
what Contact Improvisation is as of
what I feel it can be. Ten years after
first learning the form, I still have the
very highest expectations of what this
simple movement practice offers. On
the eve of Contact's twentieth birth-
day, where has it already gone? Are
there not countless frontiers still await-
ing this movement? *
228 CQICI Smtrcebook
Volume 17 1992
MAKING CONTACT IN MEXICO
by John Marinelli
I recently had an opportunity to
teach contact improvisation (CD in
Mexico City, Mexico. "The Winter
Workshop Intensive for Dance Profes-
sionals," which took place at the
Instituto Nacional de Bellas Artes
(National Institute of Fine Arts), was
attended by professional dancers and
dance students from all over Mexico.
For three weeks I taught two 2-hour
classes a day, one with students and
the other with dance professionals.
The workshop took place from De-
cember 1-20, 1991.
Other instructors for this intensive
were Sara Pearson, Patrick Widrig,
Jeremy Nelson, Nancy Topf, and Dan-
iel Nagrin. Jaime Ortega and Marcella
Broughton, who are dancers from New
York City, were our translators. The
organizer of the event was Lidya Ro-
mero, Director of Dance at the Insti-
tuto. Lidya and our other hosts were
very gracious and the students were
extremely receptive to new ideas, both
in body and mind. They had been
exposed to only a bit of CI before and
were mostly trained in Graham tech-
nique, so I expected bodies that were
not malleable to CI, but I was wrong.
They learned the skills and form of CI
very well and were willing and able to
integrate this different movement
paradigm into their bodies.
The workshop setting presented me
with the opportunity to rediscover the
beginnings of the CI form for myself.
I decided to ask questions to help
focus my teaching: What is contact
improvisation? What is my point of
view of the form? How is it taught to
dancers who know very little about it?
What is the essence of CI and its basic
skills? What do I think are the most
important things to get across about
the form? Even though I have taught
CI to beginners many times, I felt
more responsible because this was
another country and the dance ideas
out of which CI originated had not
permeated their culture. Besides, it's
exciting to start from the beginning
again after so many years. I enjoy
a:;:king questions and gaining new
perspectives and getting fresh insights.
I divided the basics into different
categories: internal skills such as
awareness of inner space, including
gravity, mass, weight, and volume;
learning to give and take weight; and
following a continually changing point
of physical contact. There are also
several senses that need to be devel-
oped when learning CI, whether
learned consciously or unconsciously.
These are the sense of weight shifting,
the proprioceptive sense, the kinesthe-
tic sense, and the disorientation of the
vestibular sense of balance.
There are also a number of physical
skills that can be taught and practiced
including "nameable" skills such as
rolling, sluffing off, platforming and
draping, body surfing, falling, giving
and taking weight, and counterbal-
ancing.
Dancing contact improvisation is
about learning a new movement lan-
guage based on these senses and skills.
CI is a type of whole body dance
technique. You get the experience of
the body-as-a-unit. IT brings you to
an altered state similar to that of an
athlete. You become adrenalized and
sensitive to lower brain reflexes so
that you are able to make split second
decisions about falling, breaking falls,
and taking other physical risks. In
addition, you learn to follow impulses
from moment to moment and to com-
municate those impulses through your
body. You also become adept at lis-
tening to impulses from another body.
I allotted plenty of time for open
dancing so that skills and concepts
could be integrated into the dancing. I
also set up structures to allow for
discussion from the point of view of
the dancers as well as from the obser-
vers' perspective.
Volume 17 1992
I stressed that the form is about
dancing from the inside out. First you
become aware of and align with the
physical forces of nature. On the frrst
day, I began with a body awareness
exercise; while lying down, sense the
mass, weight, volume, gravity, and
points of contact with the floor. In
standing, I led the experience of the
small dance of tiny weight shift ad-
justments we unconsciously do that
keep us in the vertical plane.
The next day I introduced the skill of
following a continually changing point
of physical contact, as well as the
concept that weight shifting is a sense.
On the third day I did exercises to
introduce the idea of maintaining
balance while in disorienting relation-
ships to the ground.
To sum up, the concepts that I cov-
ered the first week are as follows: four
senses (proprioceptive, kinesthetic,
vestibular (dis)orientation, and weight
shifting); aligning with gravity, mo-
mentum, and movement impulses;
following a continually changing point
of physical contact; giving and taking
weight; learning the art of controlled
free falling; listening with the body.
After this first week of introducing
the concepts and doing some open
dance structures, I wondered about
which step to take next to get to the
dancing form that I recognize as CL I
CQICI Sourcebook 229
don't care whether people do ''pure"
CI or not I don't want to be pedantic
simply to maintain control, but to
insure safety. My interest is in shar-
ing the experience of freely falling
through space and aligning with what
Cynthia Novack described. in her book
Sharing the Dance: Contact Improvi-
sation and American Culture, as the
"third force" that is both of you and
neither of you.
Skills are fun in and of themselves
and they help you to find new places
in your dancing. However, while
dancing, you want to be feeling it
from the inside rather than looking at
it from the outside. CI is not only
about learning skills and doing them in
a dance. It is also about listening and
communicating. It is about sensing
where the impulses and motivation for
dancing originate. It is about discov-
ering the place where the impulses
come out of your physical relationship
to each other and the physical forces
that you share while in contact The
movement ideas arise out of this
shared energy relationship.
I had these thoughts during the
round robins, because although the
students were extremely open to the
form and the energy ran high, it dissi-
pated very soon instead of building or
growing. I wanted to show techniques
for letting the momentum of a dance
build and also for finding different
energy states within a dance.
Therefore, for a focus during the
second week, I decided to work with
the elements of air, water, earth, fire
and ether as originally presented in CI
by Nancy Stark Smith. In addition, I
wanted to expand on disorientation
concepts as a way of letting go of the
'egohead' of dancing and allowing the
body's reflexive responses to take
over. I also continued teaching skills I
had introduced in the first week.
The "elements" turned out to be a
good way to talk about and feel the
different states and qualities that a
dance can have. After a week of
230 CQICI Saurcebook
focusing on skills and taking them into
the dancing, the element of fire (un-
leashing wild and high energy) added
a quality of freedom to the dancing,
and the dancers' creative resources
seemed more accessible. It was also
helpful to use the polarity of air and
earth (levity and gravity) and I focused
on how to mutate between these two
states. Doing water-flow dances with-
out limb support was a helpful ap-
proach to changing movement patterns.
However, it was when I introduced
the element of ether (unpredictable
qualities) that the dancing really be-
came engaging, both to watch and to
do. Up to that point they had been
tied to a form based on a continuum
from skills to dancing, much like
ballet where steps are combined to
make a dance. With the ether concept,
there is a whole range of movement
qualities that are available to the danc-
er, and what I feel is the inherent
unpredictability of CI duet dancing
became accessible. Dance structures
like the round robin could remain
energized much longer and with more
variety in movement, qualities, and
dynamics. The personality of each
person came out which added texture
to the dancing.
For the third week I allotted plenty
of time for open dancing and discus-
sion. I feel that the way to get better
at CI is to do it (a radical thought
indeed) and discuss it I also taught
some more advanced skills such as
running and jumping onto a partner,
windmills and other dynamic lifts,
handstand techniques, and dancing
scores.
Each day, the dancing was getting
progressively more recognizable to me
as the CI I have seen in its many
permutations. The communication was
clearer and the dancing developed
from the contact instead of from the
willful mind. A feeling of trust within
the form and within the group was
becoming more apparent
To culminate the experience of the
three weeks, during the final day we
combined the classes and did a contact
jam with the students and profession-
als together. The dancing was highly
skillful and at an extremely high ener-
gy level. I was gratified to see the
dancing become more fully realized
within the form. It reminded me of
the early days of CI in the U.S. where
experimentation and an attitude of
testing one's limits prevailed.
There were limitations in having
only three weeks of teaching time.
For example, the slow, sensuous quali-
ty that CI can have was not present
enough to offset the high energy,
adrenalized dancing that dominated the
open dancing sessions. I would have
liked to have had more time to allow
the dancers to engage in many types
of dance energies and qualities, and to
explore extending the form in other
ways. However, I think that this will
all come when the physical limits have
been fully tested. The form will grow
from the unique combination of ener-
gies of these dancers in Mexico. Who
is to know or judge what new direc-
tions the form might take in this un-
tapped environment?
During the third week, I made Shar-
ing the Dance and four issues of Con-
tact Quarterly available during class
time and there was much interest in
these publications. I encouraged them
to write to let CQ know what is hap-
pening in Mexico regarding CI and
related dance. They expressed an
interest in having contact jams and
open improvisaiton sessions in Mexico
City. It will be interesting to see what
develops. In closing, I would like to
thank Lid.ya Romero, Instituto Nacio-
nal de Bellas Artes, the organizers,
and the students for making the work-
shop possible and a total pleasure. I
appreciated the dancers' openness,
high energy, and graciousness. I hope
this is the beginning of a dance dia-
logue with the rich culture of
Mexico.*
Volume 17 1992
3 DAYS
Steve Paxton
Joint Forces, a dance company founded by Alito Alessi
and Karen Nelson, has presented four annual DanceAbility
workshops, sharing Contact Improvisation dance with
hundreds of people, some able-bodied and some with vari-
ous physical disabilities. This year's DanceAbility, pro-
duced by Alito, took place for 3 days in mid-March, 1991.
Eugene, Oregon is a city designed to be wheelchair
accessible and has provided the Hilyard Community Center
for disabled folk as well. It is a handsome center, and as
an able-bodied person, I enjoyed the extra space and wider
doors which result when a building is designed to accom-
modate people who use wheelchairs. A problem for many
disabled folk is our society's commercialization of space.
It can be difficult these days to get out of a car without
chipping paint on the doors of three vehicles. Vans modi-
fied to raise and lower wheelchairs need the equivalent of
two spaces.
So, for those disabled people able to drive to the center
on Friday, it was easy to park, descend to ground level,
wheel into the building with its automatically opening
doors, and attend the orientation meeting for DanceAbility.
Originally, DanceAbility was to be held at the Center,
but Saturday and Sunday's workshops had to be relocated
to a more spacious high school gymnasium. The planners
had not foreseen the large turnout for the event; disabled
people are known stay-at-homes.
Some disabled folk objected to the concept of the pur-
pose-built spanking-new community center for the disabled.
The problem is how to integrate the populations, not segre-
gate them into separate facilities. Bruce Curtis noticed that
the men's toilet had no urinals, and though admitting it was
a detail, felt that it was a symptom of a lack of consider-
ation for the able-bodied, and as if all men with disabilities
were in wheelchairs.
Getting pissed-off about the pissing facilities expresses
the sensitivity of the activist Bruce was invited to Dance-
Ability as a facilitator. He is a quad-a quadriplegic-in a
wheelchair, from San Francisco. He has been active in
Volume 17 1992
Pete
teaching and performing dances with his able-bodied part-
ner, Alan Ptashek. Alan is a veteran of a movement form
called Contact Improvisation, a sort of partnered gymnastic
improvisation. He answered the phone one day and found
Bruce at the other end. Alan is a gifted partner and he and
Bruce, who has no control of his legs or fingers, began to
work out together.
Most forms of dance partnership suppose that one part-
ner leads, the other responds: in CI however, either dancer
may initiate or respond. After the movement starts, a new
possibility arises; to follow the momentums established and
to continue them while remaining in touch with the other's
body. This is the 'contact' part of the form. The 'impro-
visational' aspect of it allows either partner to be in any
position relative to their partner or to the floor. Essentially
it is old-fashioned touch dancing taken from the vertical of
the ballroom into the horizontals and obliques of wrestling,
with, hopefully, the ability of the snooker player to intuit
momental affects.
Bruce began dancing, I believe, from a political motive,
a desire to insure that the equality of the disabled folk was
addressed; as well as his own need not to be marginalized,
which included not letting his body degenerate in a wheel-
chair. Bruce came to Eugene without Alan this year,
which is a measure of their success, and drove up the coast
in a VW bus he had modified to cope with his chair and
the ways that his limbs work.
He is accepted as a performer, invited as a teacher.
Have we heard of a quadriplegic dancer-teacher before?
No, we have not.
Yet, at DanceAbility, Bruce was not unique. Charlene
Curtiss teaches wheelchair aerobics in Seattle, for another
instance. Emery Blackwell has recently resigned the presi-
dency of OIL (Oregonians for Independent Living) to
CQICI Sourcebook 231
devote himself to dance. He has cerebral palsy to a degree
which makes speaking difficult Words are stretched. tones
distorted. His vocal mechanisms and jaw, like the rest of
his body, reflect the aspect of CP which exaggerates the
motor nerve impulses, sometimes producing kicking and
quavers in the legs, large arm gestures, flexed (athatoid)
wrists and extraordinary finger movements.
For three years Emery has worked with Alito Alessi and
they have made a duet which uses the paraphernalia of the
disabled-wheelchairs and crutches. Alito recently had an
extraordinary accident A bottle of carbonated water blew
up and severed the muscles and tendons of the front of his
right leg above the ankle, requiring surgery and extensive
rehabilitation. So he has experienced a profound, if tempo-
rary, disability. He was no stranger to the disabled; his
mother was wheelchair-bound from an auto accident when
he was young, and his duet with Emery reflects his famil-
iarity in a playful way with the mechanics of the support
systems.
Emery has also produced a short solo, for which he
made the music on his synthesizer.
Bruce, then, is not alone in taking the creative initiative
in dance. It is an extraordinary thing they are all doing.
We have seen paintings produced by disabled artists; music
of distinction has been composed by disabled musicians.
However, dance uses the body as a medium. Unlike other
arts, when one looks at a dance made by somebody who is
disabled one is looking at the dance and also the disability.
This contravenes our society's protocol regarding looking
at the disabled. But theater exists in part to provide the
opportunity for frank appraisal of human beings and per-
haps it suits the agenda of disabled performers to use the
theatrical conventions to allow us to get used to their con-
ditions. Then they get on with the creation of dance under
those conditions, without necessarily referring to them.
1'1~: l
L--·--·-··----·-___.,...._.. ________ --./
These thoughts arose because we saw two dance works
featuring Emery at the introduction to the workshop. One
was the solo he choreographed in which he rolled across
the floor, rose to his knees, turned in place, and then de-
scended and rolled away. What we see is that the rather
simple format of the dance is taxing. Emery is working at
the edge of his capabilities, just as many dancers do.
He is a striking man. The CP exaggerates his movements
and features, but his long curly head of hair, his thin face
with goatee often wetted with saliva, his intelligent and fre-
quently merry blue eyes suggest a character of some flam-
boyance. Bruce once said that the disabled are either
ignored or viewed as martyrs. But I think Emery would be
extraordinary even if the facade of CP did not provide such
a lavish filter through which to appreciate his spirit and
thoughts.
Emery's spirit lights up his actions and face. His
thoughts are thoughts set in a new body language.
Emery has said that to get his arm raised above his head
requires about 20 seconds of imaging to accomplish.
232 CQICI Sourcebook
Extension and contraction impulses in his muscles fire
frequently and unpredictably, and he must somehow select
the right impulses consciously, or produce for himself a
movement image of the correct quality to get the arm to
respond as he wants. We observers can get entranced with
what he is doing with his mind. More objectively, we can
see that as he tries he excites his motor impulses and the
random firing happens with more vigor. His dancing has a
built-in Catch-22. And we feel the quandary and see that
he is pitched against his nervous system and wins, with
effort and a kind of concentration we haven't seen before.
He has mechanisms in his mind we able-bodied have not
had to learn. His facility with them allows us to feel them
subtly in our own minds.
The taste of this we get during the short solo is much
amplified in the duet with Alito. This dance is longer and
requires that Emery be where he needs to be in time to
coordinate with Alito. The choreography provides a new
filter to show us the man. The CP appears to mask the
logic and intent until events show us that what we see has
been carefully calculated by Emery and Alito.
Can these dances avoid the obvious trap of being curios-
ities, grotesqueries, or analytical, quasi-medical displays?
It depends on the artistry, of course, and the failures of this
new geme will probably be absorbed politely, just as the
theatrical misadventures of the able-bodied usually are.
Theoretically I see no problem. Usually we think of
dance as the development of human movement potential to
superhuman levels. Another way to look at dance tech-
niques is to notice that they exclude more movement po-
tentials than they develop. Ballet works in the realm of
extension of the limbs. It does not include the contractions
of Martha Graham nor the asymmetry and sexy pelvis of
jazz. Each of these techniques operates within its own
logic, and each may borrow or quote from other systems,
but at heart they are defined by how they are limited.
These definitions are aesthetic ones, though, and it is a
difference of kind when the limitations are the result of
mischance or malady.
But we quickly grasp the logic of the limitation, be it
aesthetic choice or physical disability, and this is the point
at which the mind and spirit of the performers take over to
convey us through the moments they are there to perform.
I have seen awful Balanchine ballets. I have seen balleri-
nas with superb bodies who could not hold my attention
for sixty seconds. And conversely, I have seen disabled
performers who, without evoking pity or morbid fascina-
tion, kept me riveted to their work.
Jose Limon, a famous modem dancer, once said he felt
most alive when on stage. I have similar feelings, which
may be hard to understand by those who don't perform
regularly. What happens is that the rigidity and self-con-
sciousness of stage fright change to fluid extra power and
deeper self-awareness. For that moment you have more of
you. I guess it is adrenalin and other hormones surging
through one's system, which mixes with one's own feelings
and the feelings of the audience--who are there to witness
feelings, after all. What a broth.
For Bruce and Emery, perhaps this performance high is
the same. I view performance as an empowerment, and a
Volume 17 1992
healing, or wholing. They may have found this as well.
There is something in it for them, in other words. And if
they find it, their transcendence will fuel our transcen-
dence.
Will we find it more natural to design the disabled into
our urban environments because they will be in/on our
minds? Or are we struck with novelty? Will it wear thin?
The audience at the Center absorbed the performances
with appreciation and then watched a video of last year's
DanceAbility workhsop so they could see what they were
in for on the weekend.
Alito
SATURDAY ...
We were all together from eleven until six p.m., about
60 people at any one time, and slightly fewer disabled than
able-bodied which is a comfortable ratio. Not all the
disabled needed help, mind you. Those with CP did:
Emery, Jeff, Pete, Dana, for instance, are wheelchair
bound, and also need others to be 'hands' for them.
Jan however is a single amputee who walks with crutch-
es. She teaches skiing and could sit to the floor on her leg
and arise as easily. She needed no assistance.
Rhoda was my partner for an initial contact improvisa-
tion and then a verbal introduction. Having introduced
ourselves to each other, we were to then join a circle and
introduce our partner to the others in the group. I gave
Rhoda my history first. She replied with, "I have an over-
eating disorder. And I was molested as a child." It
seemed clear that she was introducing herself as alter-
abled. So not everyone had physical dis-ablements.
Now I looked around the room with a new attitude, and
a sense that even those of us with virtually no cause to
consider ourselves disabled might in fact be there for other
reasons that a good workout and altruism.
I asked Rhoda if I should introduce her as frankly as she
had introduced herself to me. She said I should. At the
end of that session a couple of women thanked her for her
forthrightness. Indeed, why shouldn't people simply de-
clare what happened and clear their air? Rhoda was seek-
ing an experience of safe touch. I believe she found it on
this weekend, as we all did.
We also got a lot of exercise and physical challenge. It
was at first difficult to manipulate a body in or out of a
Volume 17 1992
rolling wheelchair. People not in chairs quickly discovered
where the brakes were, and learned the advantageous ways
to extend the dance beyond the chair. Not that the chair
dido 't have a lot of possibilities. Certainly square-dancing
arm figures could be used between partners of different
abilities. And the chairs are designed for strength so it is
possible to clamber up on top of a seated partner, to lay
across the armrests, to catch a ride on a backstop or foot-
rest.
Several children spent little time in their chairs; being
small they spent a lot of time being carried, flown and
rocked.
Others were heavy to lift and manipulate, and all avail-
able contact improvisation skills were used to turn the
transitional moments into fluid ones. It certainly seemed
possible that someone would be dropped. But it became
clear that those who could leave their chairs enjoyed the
adventure, and those who couldn't such as Bjo Ashwill
with arthritis and a recently operated hand still in traction,
knew their limits, which were respected by their partners.
As the information that we were in a safe touch, safe
adventure environment dawned on us, the warmth grew.
First came safety, then came warmth. Then came ... well,
what one goes dancing for. Meeting people, doing and
seeing unusual things, finding physical challenge while
laughing. Being moved.
Our Western society has marginalized physicality. Not
just to mention the voluntary couch potatoes, or car pota-
toes, or office potatoes. We marginalize physicality by
smoothing the environment, contriving convenience. By
removing its challenges we reduce the environment's abili-
ty to stimulate our potentials. There is a trap laid for us by
city planners and architects, decorators and designers-the
couching of the country. We adore youth, but what with
one thing and another-parenthood, jobs, etc.-we lose it
too early, then cling to its superficial qualities with makeup
and varieties of cosmetic surgery. News services distribut-
ed a 'filler' this last summer: the same percent of the U.S.
population is overweight today as was in the 1960s. The
joggers are more evident, the potatoes are not in the public
eye.
So if it is normal for us to marginalize physicality, the
folk who are disabled are relegated to an even more sedate
existence. Emery, however, has found a way out. He is a
notorious bicycle rider. He tours Eugene for hours most
days, cycling 30-40 miles on a bike specially designed for
him. With this and dancing with Alito he has a body
packed densely with muscle; and when he is lifted, the
hoister quickly realizes that, although he appears slim and
cannot control many actions, his is an athletic body.
Gerry Overington, who is blind, finds most available
forms of exercise boring. Tandem cycling or running,
without the visuals, is just work for the legs and a little
wind on the face. Touch dancing with a sighted partner
allows Gerry to move his body freely, without worry about
the space. Gerry has become proficient at contact improvi-
sation because it provides the fun of moving, and because
he and his partner meet as equals in the sense of touch.
For the quads, paraplegics, CPs, etc., the exploration of
CQICI Sourcebook 233
spherical movement retains its thrills, and the kinetic plea-
sure of leaving the chair and having a dance which in-
cludes rolling, taking and giving weight, guiding and being
guided, accelerating, pausing, and balancing alone provides
enormous stimulation. Emery and Pete seemed to become
rapturous when dances went well.
The spirit of the event was nothing like the usual physi-
cal therapy. In fact there is no 'therapeutic contract' with
the participants. The contract is to experience contact
improvisation.
With the video and the performances of Friday evening
everyone had a notion of what it is. But teaching it physi-
cally is another, more complex, matter. A group including
various disabilities is like a United Nations of the senses.
Instructions must be translated into specifics appropriate for
those on legs, wheels, crutches and must be signed for the
deaf. Demonstrations must be verbalized for those who
can't see, which is in itself a translating skill, because
English is not a very flexible language in terms of the
body.
Questions and discussions may be slowed by the inabili-
ty of some of the participants to speak clearly, or at all.
Pete, for instance, communicates by glancing at letters and
numbers on a plexiglass board. Sighting through the plas-
tic and meeting Pete's gaze, the reader can see the letter
Pete is looking at When it is verbally identified, he
changes to the next letter. This is ingenious, if laborious,
but Pete's patience never seems strained. Several children
were both physically disabled and deaf, and Penny, a fluent
signer, was on hand to ensure they weren't left out
Bruce called the large group to order every so often and
talked about skills of weight-giving or rolling. Perhaps he
was not so concerned with imparting skills as changing the
atmosphere from the good-natured chaos which tended to
prevail to one where anyone who was confused., or in an
unhappy partnership could find ground and conscious
change.
The rest of us who were there to facilitate, Karen Nel-
son, K.J. Holmes, Riccardo Morrison, Alito and I, tended
to roam the gymnasium looking for difficulties. We would
expect at least some minor difficulties in such a huge
mixed group of relative non-dancers, but few if any were
found over the weekend. I think we tended to err on the
side of caution. Folk who weren't dancing were choosing
to watch or rest But their presence at the event spoke for
them. They had come to dance.
SUNDAY ...
And dance they did. All day Saturday, all day Sunday.
By Sunday afternoon the gym was spread with picnic
lunches and people were casually sharing their food. I sat
around a generous spread with a number of others, and
realized that most of it had been provided by Rhoda, with
her overeating disorder, who had brought enough for others
who might have overeating disorders. It was consumed.
People talked and laughter echoed often. Children of
participants played in and out of groups, appropriating
empty wheelchairs to play in. Being children of disabled
parents meant they knew how to use them.
One toddler had bells on her shoes. Her main amuse-
ment was to toddle, and the jingle on her feet let her moth-
er, a young blind woman, know where she was.
What her mother didn't see was that her daughter tod-
dled in and out of dancing spaces where adults were con-
tending with difficult balancing and fairly high-level physi-
cal forces. Occasionally gasps were raised among watch-
ers. But the child spent ten hours over the weekend doing
this and never came to harm. She just tinkled through
whizzing wheelchairs and under lifted adults, the bells
giving us some warning that she was there. Perhaps hav-
ing a blind mother gave her a sense of responsibility for
her own seeing and moving far beyond her years, because
rarely did anyone have to alter movement to accommodate
her, and finally everyone accepted that she could partici-
pate as she pleased.
Another woman brought two kids, a boy of about 8, and
a small, sweetfaced girl about 4. This child was not as
independent as tinkle-toes, and sometimes wanted to crash
her mother's dances-to join in the fun or reclaim her
mother's physical attention. Her brother however, with
many a strange noise and apparently casual intervention,
would divert his little sister. He would step in the way or
invent a pulling game, or distract her with a fantasy image.
Sometimes this didn't work. When she persisted, she was
welcomed into the dance by both dancers. Or mom would
see that her daughter did need some individual attention
and excuse herself to dance with her. The boy's job was
effective though. Part sheepdog, part Charlie Chaplin, he
managed to give his mother a lot of dancing time.
Emery
Pete's Story
Pete Theophanes, 19, had in Emery a strong ally in com-
munication. Emery had taken him out for events and knew
Pete's situation at home. When Pete needed to express an
urgent problem, Emery provided the background informa-
tion which clued the rest of us into the picture. We were
pulled into the thick of it
It happened during a meeting of the whole group, when
one of the facilitators had called for a round robin, in
which the group forms a circle and a few couples at a time
dance in the center. Outside the main group, a few of us
were circled around Pete, taking turns reading through his
letter board, trying to figure out what he wanted. Cerebral
palsy happens at birth. If born with an inability to con-
sciously control one's body, including speech, it can be a
struggle to convince the world to take one's mind serious-
ly. Pete's body has to be propped up in the wheelchair,
234 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 17 1992
with both elbows tucked inside the armrests, or he slumps
alarmingly to one side. His wrists are flexed 90 degrees.
Pete could control only the direction of his eyes. Before
he learned to read there must have been little communica-
tion.
On Saturday he had a good time, I gather, because he
came again on Sunday, though against the wishes of his
grandparents, his guardians. They are devout Christians,
and Sunday is the day for church. Nonetheless, they al-
lowed Pete to return for the middle part of Sunday's work-
shop.
Pete didn't want to go home. He wanted to explain that
we should call his aide and tell him to come at 6 rather
than at 4 p.m. But as interpreters we were too tired to
keep this long sequence of letters in mind. Emery sat
pondering as several of us tried and failed. Suddenly he
got it and said, "What about your grandparents? We'll
have to phone."
Pete's excitement was contagious at this point. He was
grinning and sighting out his message: "Phone her, tell her
I'll be home at 6. And hang up before she can answer."
It came to me to make that call. I could not follow
Pete's script, though. I had been warned about the strength
of personality of Pete's grandmother, and in the event my
proposal of a two-hour extension for Pete was swept aside.
Pete had to get ready for church. His driver was coming.
These aides are sometimes in delicate relationships.
When Pete's aide learned what Pete wanted, he was tom
between Pete's needs and rights, and the agreed arrange-
ments. Pete was proposing to change that arrangement on
his own, yet if the aide granted Pete that power, he would
be dismissed, or in hot water, at least. Pete, at 19, is
legally able to determine his own schedule. And grandpar-
ents might be old-fashioned, stuck in their ways, and over-
protective. But an agreement had been made.
Those engrossed with Pete and this issue, an island
where time went by in the single letters of the complex
story, were Emery, Alito, the aide, myself and a young
woman named Gani. Though sympathetic to Pete's de-
sires, we were counselling a pragmatic approach: don't
jeopardize your aide and stress your grandparent's generos-
ity for just two more hours of fun. It could curtail future
chances.
Gani, to her credit, said, "Having heard their advice, if
you still want to stay I'll support your decision."
Pete needed that support. Circumstances had deprived
him of the power to execute his wishes. Friends coun-
selled against his direction. But at least one person put
Pete's wishes at top priority. Gani recognized his right to
do a thing, albeit a rash one, and kept her focus right there,
rather than looking sagely at the larger picture. When I
returned from the phone call and told Pete what his grand-
mother said, Pete emitted a peculiar sound. It was a shriek
through clenched teeth. The intensity of frustration was
ominous, but quickly passed-on the outside.
Pete was invited to a last dance, and was lifted into the
air by four dancers, and soon was smiling down at us as
they paraded by. His aide allowed this little extra time,
then Pete left; back to a world where there would be no
parades, nor much movement at all. He would, we were
told, be taken from bed in the morning to a couch, where
Volume 17 1992
he would watch T.V. and his spasming legs would be tied
to protect him from falling off. Or on fair days, he would
be wheeled into the yard for airing and sunning, his arms
tucked inside the armrests of his chair. No wonder he
enjoyed the movement this weekend.
I hope his tardiness didn't harm his relationship to his
aide, or to Emery who had invited him. Emery believes
Pete can live, as Emery does, in a place of his own with an
aide. Knowing someone who believes this encourages Pete
to try to achieve it. How does a person get from here to
there but by belief? What encourages belief like the agree-
ment of one's 'big brother'? Emery is important to Pete.
Until the last moment before DanceAbility began it was
not clear that video coverage could be afforded. Tom
Giebink, from Austin, agreed to exchange taping for partic-
ipation and made a visual record of the weekend.
The tapes usually focus on a pair of dancers and some
exciting moments were preserved. But beyond the immedi-
ate subjects the background extends like a savannah and
the event is rather like a wildlife film-herds on the Seren-
geti of Africa, with different animals grazing and interact-
ing peacefully, young ones tripping through the foreground,
encounters, withdrawals, peripheral activities.
This effect is heightened by the live music which was
provided on Sunday by Suse Millimon. It was amplified
voice and keyboard with long chords. The atmosphere it
made was meditative and earthy.
To shoot the fmal meeting Sunday afternoon, Tom sat in
the center of the circle around which we all sat or squatted,
hunkered down in. It was a moment for every voice to be
heard, or read. People spoke up when there was silent
space and they felt moved. Most participants thanked the
other participants, and the organizers. It was difficult not
to be a little teary inside. We bad spent three days togeth-
er and a warm bond had grown. Everyone bad bad fun,
been treated with dignity; so we respected each other and
felt an intense vicarious pleasure in each other's smiles and
laughter.
A large family group was beaded by the Klopen-Owens,
a couple from Corvallis, Caucasian, who have 4 kids-at
least 3 of whom were from India, two of whom were deaf,
one of these with CP as well. He was Dana, a small 9
year-old.
Dana is a bit athatoid, like Emery, with bent wrists, and
is unable to stand alone. At some point Sunday morning
Alito had placed him in my arms. He was a light bundle
and felt fragile. During this dance I became hopelessly
confused about Dana.
For one thing, he had frequent involuntary movement of
his head which was, in ordinary body language, 'no'.
When he became excited be squealed. His smile was
bright and handsome, but when he was asked a question,
the effort of answering caused it to fade. The sort of
CQICI Sourcebook 235
question I asked was, "Is this OK?" The smile would fade,
the head shake 'no'.
When carried on my shoulder, he shouted, "Dad, Dad!"
and shrilled a squeal. A bit insecure by this point, I as-
sumed he was frightened. Later I discovered he just want-
ed his dad to see him, like most kids.
But most perplexing was an event which occurred mid-
dance. The enormous gymnasium was constructed with a
raised center ceiling panel, and between this and one of the
side panels a forlorn basketball was lodged, having soared
and stuck. Lifting Dana high, I said, "Do you see that
basketball?" and he immediately said, "How did it get
there?"
So ordinary. Later I was told that Dana was deaf, and I
never heard another sentence from him. It does sometimes
happen; a state of grace slips in during an unconsidered
moment, and clarity emerges. But when self-conscious or
under social pressure, grace goes and communication is
strained with the distortions and complications attending
the affliction.
Penny used sign language with him, and we have on
tape what I take as an interesting misunderstanding be-
tween them. Alito was dancing with Dana, and Penny
chanced by. Alito asked her to ask Dana if what he was
doing was OK.
She sign-mimed the question. Dana thought it over. His
smile faded, his head shook from side to side, and with
effort he made a sound To me it sounded affmnative.
Penny thought it was negative and asked if he wanted to
go slower, if anything had hurt his body. Dana struggled
to reply. He had trouble coordinating 'yes' and 'no'. Now
he had to convey that nothing hurt, and that he loved to
fly.
Alito intuited what was going on and said, "Naw, he
wants to go fast, don't you?" Dana grinned. So Alito,
holding Dana in the cup of his belly, rocked over back-
wards, and continued to rock forward and back, higher and
higher. Dana's smile got bigger and wider.
Later I saw Dana's father flying him. With his hands
under Dana's arms, he swooped him up from the floor,
circling him high into the air and back to the floor. This
probably was what Dana was accustomed to.
As we were saying goodbye to each other in the final
group circle, Dana's mother and father spoke for their kids.
They thanked all of us who had touched their children's
lives, and Mrs. Klopen-Owen thanked us all for giving her
a day off. "We did hope that Dana would meet others like
him. It isn't easy for a little guy with CP to find a role
model. But luckily for him, Dana has found Emery, and
has something for him."
And with that, Mr. Klopen-Owen held up Dana's arm.
Clutched in the small hand was a yellow scrap of paper.
"His address!"
Dana's head was, for once, not wavering. His gaze was
fixed on Emery, and he grinned hugely as his arm was
raised.
Alito Alessi, Pete Theophanes and Emery Blackwell
at DanceAbility, 1991.
236 CQ/CI Saurcebook
Volume 17 1992
But then no one knew what to do. A protocol had been
tacitly accepted not to give aid unnecessarily. So his
parents did not convey the address, or Dana, across the
circle to Emery. Dana fidgeted off of his father's lap, and
a few feet beyond Then his coordination failed him and
he lay, limbs moving uselessly, still trying to get to Emery.
Emery was hip to it and reacted quickly. He heaved
himself off the several friends he was draped across and
heaved and rolled, just as in his solo, over the expanse of
the gym floor.
No one moved to help him, either.
Spasmodically, grotesquely, Emery humped over to
Dana. He attempted to take the paper, but a further prob-
lem emerged; neither he nor Dana could make their hands
work to make the transfer. Emery's fingers were all coil-
ing with effort, but not coordinating. Dana's hand could
not unclench. Emery began to emit groans.
Failing to refine his motor effort, Emery tried to envelop
Dana, address and all. Both were, at this point, on the
floor at angles to each other and no available coordination
created the cuddle which was intended In the attempt,
Emery was flailing Dana with his wrists, and emitting
involuntary roars of effort.
Dana was mostly without expression, looking dazed
Fortunately a smile appeared to reassure us viewers that he
was not frightened by the energy directed at him. He
might well have supposed that his role model was trying to
devour him. Dana managed to unloose the note. It fell
onto Emery's chest, then to the floor between them.
Emery knew he couldn't manage the finesse of picking a
paper up from the floor, and rose unsteadily to his knees
above Dana. His arms stretched out from his shoulders
and his wrists bent down with fmgers writhing like sea
anemonies. He looked like a mad magician triumphantly
incanting over his victim; or possibly about to topple on
his victim.
But then, all these images are beside the point. These
are masks, the body language thrown up by CP, which
cause a confusion in interpretation.
All Emery was trying to do was hug Dana, and this he
managed, .sort of. He rolled Dana up against his knees,
then sank down beside him, pinned him with his forearm,
and nuzzled Dana with his goatee. Dana grinned
Finally someone from the circle spoke. "Will anyone
describe what's happening for those who can't see?" It
was the stuff of old Russian novels, or operas, or long
silent films, but as I described it it flattened in my mouth
into a street comer encounter. What a high failure of
communication. Fifty-eight people saw a moment of dra-
ma, and the blind heard only the plot line. The sighted
heard my pitiful effort, but only a couple of people spoke.
Under the pressure of the moment we gave up and in
silence felt the gaps between the senses.
Emery meanwhile was declaiming •.• something. "Songay
ewiri whyyeahh ooeyer." "Someday," Emery was telling
Dana, "we will ride bicycles together." +
Volume 17 1992 CQ/CI Sourcebook Z37
A;-.,
y
~i';f·''-::'''
Alito Alessi and Emery Blackwell in Wheels of Fortune.
by Bjo Ashwill
The kleig lights click into total
black. A single round spotlight creates
a circle on the black, bare stage floor.
The audience hears a metallic rattle and
a thumping sound. Into the light,
lurching and then pausing, lurching and
then pausing, staggers a manual wheel-
chair. A man seated in the chair,
wearing a second manual wheelchair
like an Iron Maiden over his head and
torso, is pushed into the light by the
power of a man with cerebral palsy
walking on his knees. Two crutches,
hanging off the back handles of the first
chair, drag alongside this clunky, noisy
entourage.
The performance dance piece Wheels of
Fortune, created by Alito Alessi of Joint
Forces Dance Company and Emery
Blackwell, has begun. The two men
then explore the "in's" and "out's" of
wheelchairs, crutches and a single
straight backed kitchen chair.
The space, the props, the emotional
entanglements of physical shape, speed
and movement are used to their full
advantage. It is an emotionally power-
ful piece. Why? Is it the subject mat-
ter? Or is it the dancing? Is it the fact
that one man has a physical disability?
It is impossible to sort out all the factors
and isolate what exactly motivates the
positive response and feedback it
receives. Maybe it doesn't matter. The
end result is perhaps what is important.
But Emery Blackwell, a dancer and a
man with a disability, sometimes
wonders. It is hard to measure how
much of the response is to his talents as
a dancer and how much is ·the audi-
ence's preconceived notions of how
little a person with a disability can
actually accomplish. If the audience be-
lieves people with cerebral palsy can't
do much more than hang out in a chair
and spasm, then anything he does on
stage will create a "standing ovation."
Emery, the dancer, has a hard time
reading the responses accurately.
Honest feedback is what he wants.
An example of how people view him
throu~ their own disability "biases" or
"filters" came at a feedback session at
the Breitenbush Contact Jam in Oregon.
Emery had danced his solo piece There
and Baclc Again. Several of the dancers
made comments like how powerful his
smile was when he rose from the floor
and up onto his knees. And how sad
they felt when he went from the kneel-
ing position back to rolling on the floor.
To them, the dance meant that for a few
brief moments a person with a disability
rose up, nearly standing (like them), but
fell back into the agonies of disability.
When asked what was in his mind
when he choreographed the piece, Em-
ery said, "It's a piece about cycles. I am
a flower blooming. It grows to full
bloom and then dies, to bloom again.
It's about joy and spring."
238 CQ;t:I Sourcebook
Volume17 1992
Emery has been a man with a physical
disability all his life. Being Emery, the
dancer, is a new wrinkle. And he loves
it
Asked if he considered himself a danc-
er or someone who plays with dancing,
he responded, "I think in time I will
study to be a dancer. At first, it was
fun. I spent a few weekends and the
time moved on. Alito pushed me more
into dance and I got more into it after
that first performance of Wheels of For-
tune. After I worked with Alito all win-
ter, I got hooked. Then I started ques-
tioning if people took me as a dancer or
just as a gimp. I would label myself a
beginning intermediate dancer. I know
some basic Contact, but I feel I am new
with it. You know, if it weren't for
Alito, I wouldn't be dancing. He was
open-minded and positive. He even
reminds me that my own movements
are normal and natural. I keep forget-
ting, trying to dance like the able-bod-
ied. Me, thumping my knees on the
floor, is dancing. Not disability dance
technique-but just plain dancing."
All this "dance stuff' happened one
day, several years ago, in 1988. Emery's
first love was and still is bike riding.
Emery was wheeling down the side-
walk on his three-wheeled cycle, a hel-
met on his head, strapped in like an
astronaut straining against gravity and
pining for the open roads where he
could feel the wind racing past his face,
pushing against him in a rough and
friendly embrace, like wrestling with a
good buddy. Suddenly, a smiling man
flagged him down and handed him a
flyer, yapping on about some kind of
DanceAbility workshop where people
with disabilities and able-bodied people
get together and dance.
"It's called Contact Improvisation.
You'll love it," Alito continued.
"Sure," smiled Emery, taking his flyer.
Anything to appease this very friendly,
obvious nut "Sure, I'll come," he said
and wheeled off, not giving it another
thought.
The universe, in her gentle way, never
leaves things to just a single chance.
She places more than one hint in front
of a person. Emery's friend Keith came
by and asked Emery to go to this Con-
tact Improvisation workshop with him.
Emery shrugged, "OK." It would prob-
ably be an all right way to spend a
weekend. Why not. So he went.
Interesting stuff started to happen.
"C
::r
0
~
::0
0
g.
c
fl>
~
3
c
s
...
~
Emery in front of WOW Hall, Eugene, 1991.
Volume 17 1992
People with all kinds of disabilities
were sliding out of their wheelchairs
and rolling around on the floor, moving
with able-bodied people. That, in and of
itself, wasn't so unusual. Physical Ther-
apy and Therapeutic Recreation created
that kind of experience. What was
different was the feeling. The attitude.
These people weren't trying to make
Emery move faster or differently than
his body could or wanted to. These
people didn't sit there, waiting, with
disguised impatience as Emery tried to
catch up to them. No. These people
acknowledged his body, its particular
movement style and speed as perfectly
normal and acceptable. Just as Emery
had done since birth.
More than that, they actively appreci-
ated his movements as something
they'd like to learn to experience, to use
in their own repertoire in dances. Alito
has often said that he creates the Dance-
Ability workshops for selfish reasons.
Most people credit him with a do-good-
er attitude of bringing dance and move-
ment to the disabled. "Ain't he just
such a good-hearted guy?" Alito laughs.
"I do this because it brings me more
information I can use in my own explo-
ration of physical movement and dance.
Everyone has body movement habits.
In order to break my habits, I try on
other people's movements, like a new
hat or a shirt. I gain a great deal from
people with disabilities. They show me
how to move and experience my body
in new ways."
Emery laughs, "You learn by other
people's movements. It's the opposite
for me. I'm learning to relax and ex-
plore my own movements, without the
pressure from others to do it 'more
normally' or faster. It's freedom to feel
my own natural rhythms and be accept-
ed and enjoyed for being exactly who I
am."
Emery went to several DanceAbility
workshops, which are presented once a
year. After the second workshop, Em-
ery attended another Joint Forces
event-the Breitenbush Contact Jam, an
annual weeklong international gathering
of contact improvisors. At that first
jam, Emery realized there was more to
this dance than just having fun. Here,
he created and performed in his first
choreography, a group piece called
Bumped. Asked how he created Bumped,
Emery described it in this way: "I was
trying to get across that I am not dis-
abled and that anyone could become
disabled any time. Sometimes when
you are seen as disabled, you become
invisible. I was coming back to the jam
after spending a day at the Salem Legis-
lature lobbying for the rights of the
disabled. I was thinking about that
experience. They thought I was dis-
abled, but when I returned to the jam,
CQICI Sourcebook 239
photo: Cliff Coles
Alito Alessi and Emery Blackwell
in Wheels of Fortune.
these people did not think of me as dis-
abled. Hey, neat, I thought That
would be a neat dance. I was thinking
of my political work, how I always try
to tell them you have more chances of
becoming disabled than you do winning
the lottery!!
"So, at the jam, four of us were play-
ing around with the idea. I told them
the main idea and we worked from
that. Everything else just fell into
place." When someone was bumped
into the wheelchair, they became invisi-
ble and the others would continue danc-
ing, bumping into the wheelchair with-
out noticing it or the person in it Then
the person would get bumped out of
the chair and become visible and the
others would begin relating to them
again and someone else would get
knocked into the chair and become
invisible, etc. "The chair made the piece
either fast or slow. If you dance with a
chair, it governs the speed.
"I'll tell you something else," Emery
continued. "Dance has helped me reach
people more powerfully than my years
of lobbying the legislature have. As
President of OIL (Oregonians for Inde-
pendent Living), I have spent hours
(which sometimes feels more like years)
240 CQ;O Sourcebook
intellectually talking about equality,
equal access, that we are people too,
just like everyone else. I'd talk and talk
and make small progress. But one
dance and people just 'get' it. It opens
up communication in more equal ways."
Alito and Emery did a performance
for the Governor's Arts Awards at the
Hult Center in Eugene, Oregon. After
the show, Emery sat back, trying to be
out of the way, but he failed! These
people, white, rich, older, the same
people Emery lobbied at the State
House, came up to him. They lined up
to express their admiration about the
dance.
They responded to Emery in just the
same way the Eugene schoolchildren
did. Emery and Alito did their dance
for 8 different schools in a three week
period. Five thousand kids saw Emery
and Alito dance. A barrier had been
broken. It was OK to reach out and
talk to this human being.
The dance made people question their
own enculturated thinking. The Wheels
of Fortune dance is all about who sup-
ports whom, what helps what, who is
disabled and who is able-bodied.
Sometimes the wheelchair supports
Emery, sometimes Alito. Sometimes
Emery supports the chair, or Alito
wears the chair, or a "normal" chair (one
without wheels, a mere Chevrolet com-
pared to a Cadillac) is the support. It
all twists and turns, changing like a
kaleidoscope. That is the truth. And
that truth is different than the set-in-
concrete notions of the general "tempo-
rarily able-bodied" person. They think
the chair holds up the person, period.
End of discussion. The piece dances
around the question of 'What is
normal?"
That isn't a question that Emery
spends much time on. He knows what
is normal. His body and the way it
moves is normal That's the way it has
been from birth. Unlike a person who
meets with an accident later on, Emery
has no memories of it being different.
The trouble is that other people haven't
always agreed. They spent time and
energy trying to get Emery's body to
move differently and faster.
When he was growing up, he'd get
around by crawling on his knees every-
where. The floor, the lawn, the gravel,
it didn't matter. Then he got a manual
wheelchair. He'd propel himself
around by pushing himself backwards,
looking over his right shoulder to see
where he was going. As a result, the
skin on his knees went soft, no longer
calloused, making him unable to crawl
over the ground without pain. Now,
that was a disability.
At the age of 18, Emery got a power
wheelchair and suddenly had to change
his body habits and look forward in
order to avoid crashing into walls and
running over people. For the first time
in his life~ he felt disabled. It was a
change from old habits. He had to
adjust to it. Feeling disabled was not
an always kind of thing; it would occa-
sionally pop into Emery's head, but
mostly, he was thinking about bike
riding.
After he was introduced to the bike,
he spent some time struggling, barely
able to get around the block. With
practice and time, he now tours around
the state, on weeklong treks, zooming
downhill at 35 miles an hour. What
Emery loves about bike riding is the
same thing he's learning to love about
dance. Freedom, acceptance and being
in control independently.
Contact Improvisation has made some
changes in Emery's life. Physically, he
has learned to move more smoothly
with better balance. On bike rides,
Emery used to push hard and with
jerky movements to propel his bike on
the 40 or more mile treks. Now, his
pacing is softer, smoother and more
powerful A clear demonstration of his
capability at better balancing happened
in the bathtub. He fell and his body
used the new dance techniques of roll-
ing he had learned. A safe landing.
He learned to have more fun. Actual-
ly, that's not true. Emery always has
fun. He learned a new way to have fun
when he began dancing. One of the
major commitments Alito and Emery
have in their dance work is to have fun
as they are dancing. If they are having
fun, this will telegraph to the audience
who will be able to relax more and have
fun with them.
Emery discovered the power of the
unspoken word-the speech of dance
and movement that tells stories and
feelings more completely than the spo-
ken word. Although the main reason
Emery dances is for the fun and for the
personal experience and satisfaction, he
can't avoid the educational aspects of
Volume 17 1992
his dancing. Simply because he is dis-
abled, everything he does teaches.
Dance, Emery has learned, is a marvel-
ous, positive teaching tool. He will be
volunteering his time giving perfor-
mances in the schools and Alito is
working on grant proposals to create a
weeklong DanceAbility workshop next
year.
At the DanceAbility workshops, peo-
ple have more time to interact with him,
Emery notes-to experience him long
enough to break through their own
empathy for able-bodied people who
have to slow down their movements to
dance with him. Emery forgets he's
disabled.
At the same time, dancing with able-
bodied people makes him realize he is
disabled. Makes him aware of the dif-
ferences. Is that good or bad? Maybe
both. It depends on how he's feeling at
that moment about himself. If he's in a
good mood and feeling good about
himself, it's good. If he's tired or feel-
ing less sure of himself, it feels uncom-
fortable. It is all a part of the learning
process.
Emery in There and Back Again, Breitenbush, OR, 1991.
mental barriers. Often people start out
hesitant or outright reluctant "It is the
difficulty understanding my speech, I
think, that distresses them the most
After they realize I am an intelligent
human being, they feel relieved," Emery
says.
An interesting thing happens for Em-
ery at these workshops. There are peo-
ple at the workshop that are "more
disabled" than he is. And Emery finds
that he tends to relate more with the
able-bodied participants than with the
more disabled. Having to slow his
movements down to dance with people
with more severe disabilities than he
has (and less dance experience), Emery
began to understand and have more
At one jam, Emery danced with Gerry
Overington of England. Gerry is blind.
Emery had never danced with someone
who couldn't take visual cues as to
what the next move might be. Now
Emery was experiencing what able-
bodied people experience when they
dance with him: assuming they need to
take more responsibility for leading,
initiating the movement. This was a
somewhat new experience for Emery.
His dances have evolved from a passive
responding to a more active pursuit and
exploration of movement in contact
with others in space. But, isn't that
what Contact Improvisation is all about?
Emery also has gained the personal
freedom of acceptance. Among dancers,
Volume 17 1992
he is accepted as a dancer. His own
normal body movements and speeds
are fine just the way they are.
You know, it's funny that society has
decided to label someone who walks
differently or not at all as disabled.
Often, it's the so-called "able-bodied"
person with fine motor skills, that has
disabilities-like not being able to get
along well with others, or express their
emotions, or feeling unhappy and de-
pressed. When people who are strug-
gling with their own pain see someone
physically disabled, they often project
their initer feelings of inadequacy and
pain onto the disabled person. They
latch onto the disabled person, wanting
to help them, soothe their supposed
pain and make everything all better.
The trouble is, it doesn't work. It back-
fires. Because it's not the disabled per-
son's pain. It's theirs. People often say
how it hurts them to hear Emery's
knees thump on the floor during his
dance, thinking it hurts him. Emery
says, "Sure, sometimes it hurts. Mostly,
it doesn't. But everything in life costs a
little pain. If you want to really help,
let me experience my own pain my own
way."
People at dance workshops are often
worried they will hurt Emery, but he's
as tough as hickory wood. By being
afraid to roll on him or put weight on
him, they lessen the dance experience
for both of them. Emery tries to tell
them it's OK; after they get over their
original resistance, Emery gets bounced
off the walls and loves it
In the workshops, it also happens that
people often talk to somebody else
when they are talking to Emery, as
though they think he is deaf as well as
has speech problems.
But these are minor annoyances, ones
Emery meets with every day of his life.
What Emery gains from dance is well
worth the difficulties. Dance has wid-
ened his circle of friends. Like bike
riding, it has given him an opportunity
to meet people on an equal basis.
Dance speaks for him, breaking down
barriers and walls like so many tinker
toys.*
This article is 'based on conversations between
Emery Blackwell, Alita Alessi and the author
in March, 1991.
CQICI Sourcebook 241
THE MOVING BODY
an integrated movement course
Exposed to Gravity workshop, Berkeley.
by Alan Ptashek
In the Fall of 1990, with Bruce
Curtis, co-founder of The Exposed To
Gravity Project, I began teaching a
course at The University of California
at Berkeley called The Moving Body.
Having facilitated movement work-
shops for disabled and non-disabled
adults, adolescents and children for
five years, Bruce and I were interested
in bringing our work into the universi-
ty setting where movement exploration
could be sustained throughout a se-
mester-length period of time.
The city of Berkeley bas one of the
most visible and active disabled com-
munities in this country. At the uni-
versity, several organizations are cen-
tered around the creation of programs
242 CQ/CI Smircebook
Volume 17 1992
Bruce Curtis (bottom) and Alan Ptashek of The Exposed to Gravity Project, in The Moving Body class, UC Berkeley.
and services for both the public and
student disabled populations. Despite
the efforts of independent recreational
sports programs on campus, disabled
students lacked support and inclusion
from the Physical Education or Dance
Departments. While issues such as
liability and accessibility were often
heard, there clearly were no university
instructors who had the orientation and
skills with which to develop a viable
course where people of different abili-
ties could move and interact with one
another.
The Exposed To Gravity Project
was given county and campus organi-
zational support and we designed and
implemented a course through the
Department of Dance and Dramatic
Arts. Undergraduate and graduate-
level students would receive academic
credit and provisions were made for
allowing public participation as well.
Few administrators nor faculty fully
understood the history or scope of our
work and they had no precedent for a
course of this nature from any other
college or university in the country.
With a class of twenty five students,
we had an even ratio of those with and
without physical disabilities. Students
were majoring in and doing graduate
studies in dance, theatre, psychology,
anthropology, social welfare and pub-
lic health. Disabilities included multi-
ple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, spina
bifida, polio, arthritis and spinal-cord
related injuries resulting in paraplegia
and quadriplegia. Discussing disabili-
ties as limitations and differences that
are not always apparent, several people
in the class considered themselves as
having "hidden disabilities," such as
chronic fatigue syndrome. As in all of
our past workshops, there were mixed
feelings of excitement, caution, confu-
sion and an appreciation for new pos-
sibilities.
As a movement practice, Contact
Improvisation has been at the center of
our work, providing a coherent physi-
cal language for all participants. The
focus on physicality and sensation
established a ground for the stimula-
tion and discussion of personal, social
and political issues that became imme-
diately relevant and integral to The
Moving Body. This course is one that
feeds into areas that are societal, clini-
cal, bio-medical, theoretical, educative,
psychological, artistic, performance-
oriented and, largely, improvisational.
Steven E. Brown, in his article,
"Creating a Disability Mythology,"
adds what may be another component
area of the course, or an entire con-
tainer holding all of the before-men-
tioned areas. He says:
"Language, humor, music, stereo-
types, history, heroes. Each of
these shared experiences comprise
elements of a culture. People
with disabilities are beginning to
recognize that we, as a group,
have been developing each of the
aforementioned topics into our
own culture-a disability culture.
I am convinced that every commu-
nity harbors many heroes with
disabilities. I believe it is time to
work on the development of a
disability mythology. Myth is
Volume 17 1992
CQICI Sourcebook 243
more accessible than a document-
ed history of events; myth permits
us to be creative and expand our
tale into a story to be repeated
and retold for generations, a form
understood by every other cul-
ture."
We live in a culture that holds strict
definitions and value judgements about
what it sees as moving and not mov-
ing. With so much of daily motion
and perception dictated by task, func-
tion and particular examples of pro-
ductivity, movement at deeper levels
than external appearances are less
valued, ignored, and, at worst, unper-
ceived. How we are being seen by
others influences our self-image, pres-
ence and movements in the world. In
our classes, I feel that we were creat-
ing new layers of a collective story, a
body politic or body mythology.
Myths take shape in a ritualized space.
Several guest teachers (Dance and
Drama Therapist, Bronwyn Warren;
Feldenkrais teacher, Lawrence Gold-
farb; and Dance Therapist, Neala
Haze) were invited to present their
work during the semester. Neala
facilitated a session in Authentic
Movement. Having each student move
with eyes closed, "witnessed" by the
group, was a beautiful and evocative
ritual space. We were able to appreci-
ate the most subtly articulated move-
ments of each person, sensing and
referring to our own bodies for the
depth of response we gave one
another.
The experiential practice of the
course was augmented with readings
on dance, performance history, body
systems, developmental movement,
perception, sensory awareness, somatic
therapies, communication theories and
the use of touch in human experience.
Students kept journals and papers were
part of the requirements for academic
credit.
Many of the early classes brought
forth the awkwardness and anxiety
around physical touch between dis-
abled and non-disabled partnering. It
is very common for non-disabled
people to feel hesitant and fearful of
having physical contact with a person
in a wheelchair or one whose physical
form is shaped and moves differently
than their own. Often it is assumed
that the disabled person is brittle, in
pain or umesponsive to being touched.
In the class, students were strongly
encouraged to express their needs,
physical functioning and capabilities to
one another. This exchange of person-
al information helped to relax them
and elicit trust of an improvised and
collaborative spirit.
When encouraged to leave their
wheelchair or crutches through their
own movement or with assistance, the
initial experiences of many disabled
students (and of the non-disabled
assistant) ranged from extreme disori-
entation and vulnerability, to pleasure
and intense joy. A contained and safe
Student in The Moving Body class, University of California, Berkeley.
t::
G>
-6
2
Ill
a:
i
,..
244 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 17 1992
Bruce Curtis and Charlene Curtiss, Berkeley, 1990.
environment in which to express feel-
ings is very important in this context.
The process of dialoguing after danc-
ing allowed for us to speak from
changes in self-image and self-organi-
zation with increased awareness, sensi-
tivity and a mutual regard for one
another as moving, embodied beings in
the world
Our learning environment carried as
much influence as any of the specific
skills for falling and supporting
weight. Deane Juhan, in his book
Job's Body (Station Hill Press, 1987),
conveys a layer of this learning envi-
ronment from a physiological under-
standing: "The process is anything but
random or trial and error. It is highly
specific, and it is the periphery which
helps to organize the connections in
the central nervous system, not an
organized central nervous system
which reaches out to innervate the
periphery. It suggests that the use of
touch and sensation to modify our
experience of peripheral conditions
exerts an active influence upon the
organization of reflexes and body
image deep within the central nervous
system." Clearly, not all of the class
participants came with the same inten-
tions and interests. Most students,
both disabled and non-disabled, loved
the freedom to play and seek new
physical forms, to feel themselves
buoyant and resilient, fearless and
beautiful in their dance.
In the past year, I've been facilitat-
ing groups and workshops for profes-
sionals who work with or wish to
extend their practice to physically
disabled men and women. While
working with movement and somatic
practitioners, the focus is on how we
make contact with ourselves while
touching, supporting and moving with
someone who has a physical disability.
We look at ways to establish more of
a peer relationship. This process is a
risky one. Conventional and tradition-
al techniques are challenged, while
mutual dependency and the unknown
are brought into the relationship. This
is a process that medical science has
little familiarity with.
The impact of this course as ex-
pressed through responses from the
students and faculty of The Moving
Body strongly indicate a need and
desire for the continuance of this work
in university, clinical, community and
artistic settings. *
The Moving Body was videotaped and is
available to the public (see Dance Map in
this issue).
Volume 17 1992
CQ/CI Sourcebook 245
PATHS OF CHANGE notes on contact improvisation
in an institutional setting
a lecture by Aat Hougee
delivered along with an improvised performance
by Karen Nelson and KJ Holmes
at the 7th European Contact Teachers Conference
Geneva, Switzerland
October 28, 1991
First introduction
There must be a deeper reason for me standing here and
for Karen and KJ being here, with me on stage, at the same
time. An important reason is that it will certainly be less
boring this way. Probably the best reason.
Many of the decisions I have taken in my professional life
during the last 17 years seem to have come out of nowhere.
I don't dance, I am not an artist. but in my work as an
organizer of art. I do try to follow my intuition. This is
about the sixth lecture I am giving in collaboration with
performers. So it might be time to find out why I have been
making that choice.
[Karen reading Aat's notes]: ''To learn
about dance, I had to fall in love with
a dancer, and another one and anoth·
er one. I know, it just comes out in
words and figures, but I've gone as far
as I could. Much too far, but which
dancer doesn't ••• "
Aat Hougee was co-director of the Modem Dance
Department of the State Theaterschool in Amsterdam,
Holland (now called the School/or New Dance Develop-
ment, SNDD),from 1975 to 1989. He currently directs the
Center for New Dance Development (CNDO), a department
of the College of Arts in Arnhem, The Netherlands, which
he co-founded in 1989.
These institutions are conservatories, in effect, specializ-
ing in new forms of training dancers that have been devel-
oping in the U.S. and Europe over the last twenty years.
Putting myself in the position of a lecturer means that I
will have to use words to communicate my ideas. By using
words and using a language that most of us will understand.
we tend to create a situation that is quite characteristic for
most educational systems: it is based on the presence of those
who know, or pretend to know, and those who don't know,
or pretend not to know. It is a clear division of roles in
which most of our ideas about learning find their roots, but
somehow I am strongly under the impression that it is exactly
this division of roles that keeps both the person in the role of
the knowing as well as those who opt for the not-knowing
role, from real learning.
246 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume 17 1992
[Kl reading]: "As a kid in school I
used to know everything better than
everybody else. One day the teacher
made clear to me that I didn't know
anything. That load has stayed with
me through the years and it's only
whlle watching tv or reading my mys·
teries, that I feel secure. Standing
here, somebody will come up with a
pin, and the balloon will be gone."
When I started preparing my appearance here, some
thoughts came to mind that seem to be quite closely related
to the work that all of the people here are involved in. It has
to do with the sharing mode of Contact Improvisation and
about the challenging aspect of improvisation in general. It
seems to be a philosophical problem as well: by using
language to enter and clarify aspects of a field that goes
beyond language, one immediately seems to reduce the level
of thinking and perception.
What we want to do here is to create a simple situation
which might give us some more insight than just words. I
prepared a text including several subjects that deal with the
relation between and the development of improvisation,
education and an institution. At the same time I would like
to offer you a second line of thought-personal, emotional,
non-rational. Actually it is that line of thought, some flashes
coming from my personal life, my motivation and most of all
my fears, that might have been crucial for many of the
decisions I have made in my career and for most of the
thinking I have developed
At this point in my life I think it's possible and certainly
more objective, if that's what we are going for, to include
these aspects; maybe what I'm trying to say is: once we were
convinced that we were on our way, finding the truth, but as
we struggled along we started realizing that there is no other
truth than the one we are creating ourselves.
This personal material I handed out to Karen and KJ and
they will work with it, confronting themselves, each other and
me with material that is probably closer to not knowing and
sharing than what I have to say.
We agreed on one thing: we won't talk at the same time.
Language as a means of communication tends to be quite
vulnerable. And then: your role as an audience, you can take
it passively if you like, but there will certainly be one slot
where you will be openly invited to come in, but if you feel
the need to enter before that, or after, go ahead
Volume 17 1992
----..
A second introduction
About watching improvisation. When we go to see a set
performance we can expect that the choreographer has
developed or has tried to develop work in which he/she
knows what will happen from beginning to end We, as an
audience, know that the choreographer and the performers
know, and with that knowledge we will watch the perfor-
mance.
With improvised work, it's different. The improvising
performer enters into a process of discovery and although
certain parameters might be known, the performer will
confront himself with unknown material and will force
himself to take decisions through which new, unknown
territories will be entered. Sometimes these decisions will
lead to clear solutions, but just as often there will be empti-
ness, a search for solutions. An audience watching this kind
of work needs to be in a different state of mind than an
audience witnessing set work. When we buy a ticket at the
box-office for a set performance, it's almost like buying a
product in a store: whether we like the product or not, one
thing will be clear-it's supposed to be a complete product,
meant to be consumed like it is and we don't have to add
something unless the instructions say we have to, but in
general, the product is ready for use.
An improvised performance will confront us with a very
different situation: the ticket we buy at the box-office does
not stand for a finished product. Those tickets I would like
to call "shares." By buying one, the spectator becomes a
share-holder: sharing the risk that the performer is taking,
being present at the performance in a state of mind which
will equally value brilliant solutions as well as struggle and
despair, exciting moments as well as emptiness.
CQICI Sourcebook 247
(cont'd)
Some history
[Kl & Karen reading together]: "When
I got this job, now 17 years ago, I was
nobody, but nobody knew. It was
1975 and having some fantasy would.
open doors. I had never seen any
dance and after some weeks this Dutch
choreographer told me that if I want-
ed to do something for the dance in
Holland, I should quit my job. I had
to cry, since what else could I do with-
out a real profession.''
It was 1975 when I entered the field of dance education.
I was 29 years old, had no history in dance, but Amsterdam
was still a playful city where fantasy was valued as a valid
motivation for getting a job.
It would be quite an interesting story to lead you thr_ough
the development of the Modem Dance Department's program
and staff, especially since in that development, in the organi-
zation as well as in the curriculum, the anarchistic force and
strength of improvisation has been quite striking. But what
I think is more interesting here is to look at the development
of the students during those years and how that development
relates to the material the school has been offering and is
offering now: what were the abilities and needs of the
students at that time and what has changed since.
In 1975 the main educational objective seemed to be: to
teach students how to move, how to use their bodies in a
more complete way, to change their thinking about movement
and dance--that dance is about movement, that it is a
creative act, and that copying historical form, suffering and
sweating, are not the right ingredients to train a dancer. At
that time we would get two types of students. There were
those who saw being a dancer as meeting with accepted
standards, to be reached through intensive daily training,
strongly dominated by imitation of existing form. Most of
those students, however, were lacking the discipline to work
in such a way, partly due to the times we were living in.
Also, those students often had interesting ideas, where the
traditional training wouldn't give them the right skill to
realize those ideas.
There were other students who came without these kinds
of traditional expectations about their training. In many cases
disappointed with previous theoretical university studies, they
were ready to dive into this new world of explorative
physical and mental work. Quite a few of those students,
however, tended to take the work as a vehicle for self-
discovery. They were often not very motivated to be
performers, nor were they very interested in stretching their
248 CQICI Sourcebook
physical abilities too far. One could have blamed them for
that, but looking back, I am still grateful that these people
had the courage to support new approaches and by doing that
enabled the work, its content as well as its methods, to
become more clear, more defined. One has to realize that at
that point in time, although this was an official school in The
Netherlands, outside this school the work was not given much
value.
Results came slowly in those days: it would take the
average student about four years to become a mover, a dancer
who would show an integrated physical knowledge.
All this is about 15 years ago now: students who enter the
school in 1991 seem to be able to get to this level of physical
knowledge in not more than one or two years. It is clear to
me and to those who have helped develop the program, that
Contact Improvisation has made a strong contribution to this
process. As a very active approach to body-mind integration,
Contact seems to honor the need for pure physical work as
well as for the development of physical and mental sensitivi-
ty. Or simply said: with the arrival of Contact Improvisation,
a lot of energy entered into the work that we had been doing
until then. It would give us a new approach to training, an
explorative and creative way to learn physical skills.
Although we shouldn't underestimate the role of Contact
Improvisation and other new approaches to dance in relation
to the development of the learning-process, there is at least
one more phenomenon that is often neglected but that has
actually been quite crucial for the development of the
program. Through the years it seems that not only teaching
methods become more clear, and that certainly happened at
the school in Amsterdam, but ideas and even physical
knowledge, through time, seem to gain acceptance within our
thinking even without our ever actually having been confront-
ed with them. Certain aspects of physical knowledge that
Volume 17 1992
were once new to all of us, seem now to contain sufficient
known elements to enable both students with a more tradi-
tional background, as well as those without any experience,
to go through physical changes much quicker than when we
started with this work. It is because of this process, that's
mainly guided by time, that the way we teach and what we
teach and the way we build a program will have to change
continuously.
An open space for audience participation
[KJ reading from scraps of the text she
and Karen had torn up]: "After six
years she said she never I she asked
me for my hand to read I while she
touched the inside of my I crying and
then I my position doesn't too often"
C.I. as part of an institutional curriculum
It was 1985. The first Contact Teachers Conference took
place at the school in Amsterdam. Steve Paxton was there,
not attending the conference, but teaching at the school,
working with improvisational scores. One afternoon we were
standing in the ball and through the window in the door we
could see the meeting of the Contact teachers. At that
moment, Steve said: "Somehow I would like to open the door
and say 'no'." This is an anecdote, maybe I made it up
myself, maybe it was really said, but even if I made it up
myself, I experienced this as one of these moments that
became crucial for the development of my thinking since.
When Contact Improvisation entered the school, which
happened through an introduction by Pauline de Groot
[around 1980] and a little later through workshops taught by
David Woodberry, Steve Paxton, Lisa Nelson, Nancy Stark
Smith, Christie Svane, Danny Lepkoff and Mark Tompkins,
it did add many new elements to our thinking about dance,
improvisation and especially about dance-training.
Although strongly related to other forms we were using at
that time-release-work, alignment and several improvisation-
al approaches-Contact seemed to work as an integrative
force as well as offering a very physical alternative approach
to training. For us it felt new in terms of vocabulary, and
also in the teacher/student relation it offered new exciting
forms. It seemed to be open, explorative, daring. I remem-
ber that around that time the Trisha Brown Company came
Volume 17 1992
I
)
to the school for a lecture/demonstration, and several of the
more traditional Dutch choreographers were there as well.
One of them asked about the training of the dancers, suggest-
ing that they certainly would have a strong traditional
background. It was Randy Warshaw who answered the
question saying: "No, my only training was Contact Improvi-
sation." It felt like a true moment of Victory!
After this first intensive introduction to Contact Improvisa-
tion, we considered giving it a more permanent place in the
program, not just in the form of intensive workhsops, but on
a regular basis. At that moment, looking at the content and
format of the work, we were certainly convinced that C.L
could offer a creative and realistic alternative to replace at
least part of the more traditional technique classes. But the
problem was that unfortunately there were no teachers
available who would be willing to teach on a regular basis.
We did try to organize a regular jam, but that initiative,
which came from the students, only lasted for a few weeks.
In the years after, we kept bringing guest-teachers to teach
C.L workshops. It always would stimulate the enthusiasm in
the school, and time after time we tried regular scheduling,
using local teachers as well as long-term guests, but it never
really succeeded. Contact never took the place that we
thought it deserved.
An important reason for why this happened can probably
be found within C.L itself.
,, ....
CQ/CI Sourcebook 249
(cont'd)
[Karen & KJ reading together]: "She
asked me to find 'something that is
really yours'. But there was nothing
left that wasn't connected to dance
and to other people."
C.L has mainly been developed (outside of institutions) in
short workshops with students who made a free choice to do
this work and who were not overloaded with all the other
approaches a school program offers. In those workshops,
methods of teaching were developed in relation to the specific
demands of short and ()pen worksllop ~ituatic:ms. Cl:>ntact
Improvisation was and is not about· a historically defmed
form, like most of the other approaches to dance used in
education, but about exploration in a democratic and social
environment.
Students who study within an institutional situation seem
to develop a tendency to pass responsibilities on to their
teachers: "You tell me what I have to do, I might protest, but
if you don't tell me I will protest as well." Work that is
taught through this principle will normally fit in easily.
Contact Improvisation worked in the school program as long
as it was set up as a very special event. The lack of authori-
ty within the work made it impossible to use on a regular
basis as a replacement for more defined dance forms.
All this was quite a while ago. A lot has changed since,
especially when we look at the expectations and mentality of
the students who join the school. I think by now C.L could
have become part of the regular curriculum. But again it
didn't. Why?
During the first fifteen years of development of the school
we collected a whole range of alternative methods to train
dancers. Finding out about these methods, bow they can be
used in a school situation, how they are relating to each
other, etc. took a lot of time and energy. Through regular
workshops, C.I. played an important role in this process.
Although we managed to learn more and more about these
methods, and especially about how to use them in a more
250 CQ/CI Sourcebook
----
efficient way, we realized at a certain point that studying
these methods should never become a goal in itself. And so
we made the choice to use elements of them in the program
in an integrated way, but not to use any of the methods in a
pure form as a specialist option.
Dutin_g these years in Amsterdam,. people unconnected to
the school would often make remarks about the work being
too introverted, not outgoing enough. At that time we would
become quite defensive when remarks like that were made.
Understandable. New approaches are hardly ever clearly
recognized and we were also in the middle of a process of
discovering the applications of new methods that certainly did
require a reflective attitude. Combining this process-oriented
work with more form-oriented traditional methods was
something many of the students were asking for: but in our
opinion at that point in time, we saw these as being conflict-
ing approaches. I don't think we ever lost our belief in the
importance of form, but how to get to that non-historical
form, how to develop a way of working that would allow an
ongoing process of change in form, that was a new path we
had to find first, through exploring all those different methods
that connect physical development with the use of imagina-
tion.
[Karen reading]: "It took a long time
and I found this small green spot that
was mine and It became bigger and
bigger and I took the plane and ended
up in the mountains and got married
again soon after."
Volume17 1992
During my last years as a director of the school in Amster-
dam, a model was developed where the different alternative
"techniques" were having a clear position in the program,
through regular classes or through carefully planned intensive
workshops. Although it felt as if we had finally reached the
point where we were able to give full value to the new work,
there were doubts coming up as well.
At a certain point, one of the teachers, who had been
teaching t'ai chi for many years, retired. Students and staff
were asking: "Who will be teaching t'ai chi next year?". My
first reaction was-we'll have to find a replacement. My
answer was, however: "Nobody. We won't have t'ai chi next
year." At that moment I realized that making a program
based on subjects would, through time, inevitably lead to a
static situation, comparable with the situation most traditional
modem dance schools are in, working with methoc:ls and
ideas of people who (artistically) died long ago.
In our opinion, a school for dance should have one main
objective: to train students to be artists who will be able to
develop new forms through the use of physical means. An
objective like this does not allow any limitations. Methods
to develop creative and physical skills are just methods to
reach a goal that lies beyond these methods. Contact
Improvisation is one of them and any artist using improvisa-
tion as a way to discover new form, will not accept the
limitations that are part of this method, or of any method, but
will in fact include anything that will support this process.
Volume 17 1992
Does that mean, since many elements of Contact Improvi-
sation have been defined, that that's the end of C.L?
Certainly not. C.L has added several innovative aspects to
the training of dancers that cannot be found in other ap-
proaches. Part of teaching C.I. is teaching students to find
improvisational solutions within a certain frame of thought.
At the same time, artistically, we want students to break
through existing frames of thought and we want teachers in
their teaching to be clear about that. Because that is exactly
the lesson we learned from our battle with previous approach-
es to dance education: the importance of teaching the creative
process instead of already-defined form, teaching physical
skill through the use of physical and creative imagery, instead
of forcing students to go through forms that are no longer
connected with this time. Teaching C.I. in these terms means
teaching the knowledge that has been developed tl:lrougfi tfils ·
work, but it means at the same time teaching a mentality that
will stimulate a next generation to go beyond the results of
that: to fmd new solutions, even if that would mean the
disappearance of C.L as it is known to us at this moment.
I realize that I am able to say much of what I say because
I have been able to work from a relatively comfortable
position. Comfortable in the sense that we did get the space
and the funding to go through this development.
When I look around me in Europe, I see many studios
offering workshops. It is great that that happens, but most of
the workshops are quite short and they are often not able to
offer sufficient continuity for students, nor for teachers.
Students are not able to receive government support for their
studies and because of fmancial reasons most of the studios
are not able to select their students.
In an institution there is continuity, for students as well as
for staff, and we are able to develop material over a longer
period of time. We do have problems as well. Motivation
can be one of them, sometimes things can be too easy.
It is inevitable that, slowly, alternative approaches to dance
will enter most of the existing dance institutions. The
question is, however: in what form will that happen and what
status will they get. Most institutions work through a simple
model in which the teaching is based on a clear image of
what a student who has gone through the program should
CQ/CI Sourcebook 251.
look like. This is not just a matter of style, it is a very
specific idea about education. But even institutions like that
will, as time goes by, start including new approaches. Not
the process-aspect of the new work, but probably the form of
it. And since those forms are certainly more interesting and
connected with this time than forms they have been using
until now, it will be experienced as quite a revolution.
However, when it's about improvisational work, it could be
like a trap. Improvisation, I think, including C.1, basically
is an anarchistic phenomenon. It is about finding new
solutions. Changing existing structures and allowing it into
a static educational system would mean, if we are not just
teaching a form, the beginning of the destruction of that
system, unless one would adjust the work itself to make it fit
into the system.
Within 20 years from now the Dutch National Ballet will
include Contact duet forms in their grand gala performances
and every ballet school will have their weekly Contact hour.
In the year 2010, C.I. will have taken over the place that
Graham Technique occupies now. But also in the year 2010
there will be some people struggling somewhere in a small
studio, maybe in a few institutions, trying to develop work
that goes beyond Contact. And ·if there happens to be a
conference that year, I am sure Steve Paxton will appear,
look through that window, and whisper "no" again. *
[KJ reading]: ''I wish you were not
around at all. I wish there was no
chance to meet you anywhere. If you
wer~ not a dancer it would be much
easier for you to disappear. How
could I ever give up on my dreams. I
wish your presence wouldn't stand for
the years that won't come back. This
morning, any morning, the sun Is out
and I wish there wouldn't be a single
chance to run into you: it's a small
town this world of ours. I know this
Is your home-base, but especlally here,
right now, I would like to look more
mature than I am."
'
One of the reasons why we have been able to develop two
schools in The Netherlands has been the fact that we were
able, and made the conscious choice, to enter the institutions
on a formal level. We gained power, not through the work
itself. The work that was done in the studios, the perfor-
mances we made, hardly ever received any positive recogni-
tion. It was on the level of management, educational
organization and strategy that we gained respect and estab-
lished our role. By doing this we managed to create a
comparatively safe environment in which the seeds that were
planted by many artists in this field could develop. Within
this framework there was no need for compromise and
especially no need to let the work establish itself in a too
recognizable and static form.
252 CQ;CI Sourcebook
Volume 17 1992
JUMPING PARADIGMS
a response to Aat Hougee
"Once we were convinced that we
were on our way finding the truth,
but as we struggled along we started
realizing that there is no other
truth than the one we are creating
ourselves."
-Aat Hougee
Dear Aat,
There may be wisdom in this remark.
If it were shouted in a crowd I would
feel it deeply. But it comes from you
in your brown brick ivory tower. I
read it through again: .. . no other truth
than the one we are creating our-
selves," and see that it has a self-
serving logic.
Also, who are "we," here: The staff
and teachers at your school? Them,
plus the students? The whole human
race?
Whomever it may be, suppose some-
one is off creating a truth of their
own; do we then have two equal but
different truths? What about those
who found truth for themselves in
times gone by? What will happen to
your truth as future generations create
their own?
None of these seem durable, singular
truths. They seem to be temporary,
subjective truths. They seem to be all
in our minds.
This is not good enough. We know
it's all in our minds. The problem is,
as it always has been, what to do
about it
If we are going to be fair about it,
one thing we must do about it is not
trash the truths of others. Your chilly
remarks about traditional forms created
by (artistically) dead people through
which students must be forced, toss
aside the truths of many people, alive
and (really) dead. Why? They are not
perfect truths, of course, but you are
speaking of the dance tradition in the
West which every teacher at your
institute knows, and which I also stud-
ied and which gave me a lot of the
basis for Contact Improvisation.
Did you imagine that Contact Impro-
visation dropped out of the sky? You
use it in your institute as if it were
unconnected from past techniques.
But so intertwined is it with modem
dance (and modern to ballet) that to
dismiss any of the past dance work is
to orphan it It eliminates a lot of the
training which I assumed would be
part of the studies of people who use
it Have you noticed that there are no
exercises for the feet or legs in the
typical contact class? I assumed that
the feet, legs, circulatory systems and
joints from the past were quite sub-
stantial truths and there was no imme-
diate need to replace or erase them.
Furthermore, I assumed that these
people would also be studying Tai Chi
Chuan and Aikido, so I made CI a sort
of bridge for Western (traditional)
dance students into the unfamiliar
Eastern forms. It is an inclusive ap-
proach, based perhaps on advice I
heard from Pauline Koner, a famous
modem dancer: to study as many
techniques as I could with integrity. I
found this excellent guidance because
the real study is the human body, and
in the various technical materials from
different times and cultures a larger
range of information was available to
help with perennial problems: aware-
ness, efficiency, longevity.
'To study' meant to get it into the
body, not only the mind, which I think
requires at least 2 years of regular
class in the specific technique to em-
body the essentials.
Is there some way to use 'truth'
which is not so subjective? To follow
Pauline Koner's advice creates the
hope that one's subjective understand-
ing will continue to grow, and more
parts of one's body will come under
conscious training. It takes one from
the narrow confines of preliminary
understanding to a broader attitude
which can see other truths than one's
own (yet continue to see one's own).
In the aims you mention, " ... to get
to that non-historical form, to develop
a way of working that allows an ongo-
ing process of change in form," you
have a very clear description of the
aims of modern dance, founded at the
end of the last century. (Happy Cente-
nary, Modem Dance.) Ballet training
of foot and leg have been retained,
however.
You are a pure modem dancer and a
bit of a redneck, but these appalling
qualities will not be punished. The
past doesn't care, and you are sur-
rounded and supported by its gifts,
even though you don't seem to realize
it
Contact Improvisation is not anar-
chistic, because it is a formal coopera-
tion. It is difficult in academic pro-
grams because it has no standard
which can be graded, which may be as
difficult for the students to understand
as for the staff to cope with. It is to
be experienced rather than judged, and
our modem dance research above
suggests that the experience begins to
deepen after two years of regular clas-
ses and goes on deepening, widening,
furthering, whatever. You don't 'get
there'.
Steve Paxton
Vermont
Volume 17 1992
CQ!CI Sourcebook 253
THE FOUNTAIN AT I.D.E.A.
The Fountain is a form for collective watching and reporting
one's experience of watching. It is a direct way of sharing
with a dancer some evidence of what happened in each of
us as we watched her dance. It can be used for listening
to music, poetry, looking at a painting, etc., just as well. !rs
most important feature is that discussion is not allowed: It
has four parts:
1. Watching
2. Writing-immediately, for 3 minutes, in silence
3. Reading-out loud, in a circle, only what you wrote
4. Collecting and printing what was written
by Christina Svane
In August 1991, feeling a collective need for
feedback and support in the new dance and perfor-
mance community, I conceived of I.D.E.A. (Internation-
al Dance Exchange, Amsterdam). In October, I collab-
orated with Dutch choreographer Pauline de Groot to
create a platform for such an exchange-monthly
I.D.E.A. meetings at Pauline's studio "DE KOE." On
the Saturday closest to the middle of the month,
I.D.E.A. sponsors an open showing of work and perfor-
mance/audience interaction structures, followed by
informal exchange.
At these meetings, I have been developing a form
called The Fountain, in which spontaneous reflections
are written during a three-minute pause between
dances/performances. These spontaneous writings are
read, without discussion, at the end of the entire show-
ing. The writings are then gathered and published in
the now-bimonthly I.D.E.A LOG, nee I.D.E.A. News-
letter. The Fountain form and its resultant writings
constitute the beginning of an on-going experiment
central to the purpose of I.D.E.A.: To further the explo-
ration of dance as a collective experience in present
time and space, and to create forms through which
glimpses of that experience can be passed.
Over the course of the first I.D.E.A. meetings, I
found that by restricting formal performance feedback
to only reading what was written during the three
minutes between seeing pieces kept the exchange vital,
surprising and full of imagination. To be in communi-
cation with, rather than about, what was seen opened
up a more direct and creative transference between
audience and performer, an exchange in the dimension
dance comes from: the imagination.
The model is conversation: taking each dance as a
statement and responding likewise. The realness of
the moment and our mutual share in creating that
moment is not conditioned or tamed in any way by
calling a dance a "work-in-progress." The moment is
still absolute; the future we envision may never arrive;
the improvements we seek are secondary. In conversa-
tion, someone says to you, "I love you!" You don't
respond by telling them they should focus more on
their pronunciation. You say, "I love you, too." Or you
say something else. So this experiment is a challenge
to us to be in the moment with the performer.
Although my dream is to have a gathering of all
kinds of artists, all kinds of people, the truth remains
that we as an audience for each other are primarily
dancers. And this is, we are, a gold mine of attention
-'-highly developed attention-for each other. As danc-
ers we are skilled as listeners-listening to our sensa-
tions, to the moment we are in, to the transformation
of energy through the moment, to the level of state-
ment that moves you when you see it. It is this won-
derful degree of listening that we bring with us to each
Open Showing. The dances are the tips of the icebergs
of our experience. They are the part we can show.
For complete information on I.D.E.A meetings and I.D.E.A.
LOG, contact Christina Svane, Ruysdaelkade 25b, 1072 AH
Amsterdam. Tel. (020) 662-6827.
254 CQ/CI Sourcebook
Volume17 1992
Appendix
Steve Paxton, head in hands. photo: Kate Mount ,
DRAFTING
~~U~rR1~©rR1
TECHNIQUES
by Steve Paxton
How awkwardly we are damned if we don't or if we
do, I thought to myself after the European Contact Confer-
ence in Berlin in 1988. During a lecture event I had been
asked, "Just what is Contact Improvisation?" and I had
muffed the answer. I was being asked by a woman with an
attitude, in the presence of a number of veteran contactors,
general public, and students, and I hesitated in order to think
how the question should be answered for the whole group.
The discussion up to that point had been full of historical
revisions, elisions, pointed remarks about Americentric
heavy-footedness. In short, the European contactors consid-
ered themselves second generation users of this form and
wanted to know if they had to go through every step the
Americans had gone through; and a few people who had
come to the conference without prior experience ju~t wanted
Volume 18 1993
CQICI Sourcebook 255
I
~
an explanation of what this whole thing was and how it was
run and how did one improve and get recognition-things
like that, which would be reasonable questions in a normal
organization.
The journal you are now reading had, among other things,
been working for 15 years to elaborate on the basic answer
to "what is CI?" And as time has gone on, the answer has
shifted: away from an experimental dance phenomenon and
toward a physical practice allied with a number of complex
new body and mind studies. I have come to think of contact
improvisation as a physical event best described negatively-
not art, not sport, not most of the things which characterize
dancing in this century.
But I hate to describe things in the negative. It is
accurate, but the mystics used it first and I don't like using
their devices, which were used to try to inform students in
conversations about the ineffable.
We, on the other hand, are trying to describe the corpore-
al. But it is no longer easy to do so. It is, in fact, getting
more difficult We now know too much, or think we do; the
corporeal seems to be a complexity of social, physical,
geometric, glandular, political, intimate, and personal infor-
mation which is not easily renderable.
Once things were relatively simple. I thought I knew how
this then-nameless work should not be described. It was to
be an improvisation without any ambiguous appeals to the
imagination, because I did not know precisely what "the
imagination" was (in fact I thought doing this work might
educate me to the meanings of imagination, improvisation
etc.). For the same reason there should be no mention of
sexuality, psychology, spirituality. I would leave these in the
hands of the experts and proceed with what seemed more
immediate-the senses and the physical body.
It did seem that before I could begin to train the senses of
students, something had to happen in their brains. In
recognizing that we do not begin to move from zero, that first
we have a desire or image to launch the system into action,
I decided that I had to work in the area of images, though
cautiously. The images were to be, well, "real." That is,
they were not to be obviously umeal.
The effect of obviously unreal images upon the body is
fascinating. For example, if you are told to imagine (that
word!) your head is filled with a gas that's lighter than air,
it is difficult not to respond with neck extension and postural
256 CQ/CI Sourcebook
straightening. Why should this be so?
It may be related to the sort of mobilization which
happens when we are searching for a lost object-first, the
thought of the object, then the eye movements, the head
turning, standing up, facing in different directions, a tentative
walk to a new viewpoint or a possible site of the object All
this prompted by the mental image of the desired object
The responsiveness of the body to the image is innate,
apparently, and with this innate connection the body may be
responsive to any image the mind holds. But this is specula-
tion about things which should be the subject of investiga-
tions. Without a theory of imagination to support our
investigations, it seemed to me, we would have to improvise
without fictitious gasses in the head-if that were possible.
At any rate, I had only about a week to come to convey
the central idea before we, a group of apt students and
myself, would be doing it in public at the John Weber
Gallery in NYC each afternoon. This time pressure meant
that this effect of images on the body would be an essential
tool for quickly transmitting the initial states which would let
this physical duet/improvisation manifest as directly as
possible.
The first job was to point out this image-action connec-
tion. Then, exercises which demonstrate it in various parts
of the body had to be produced. For instance, a mental
exercise I gave while people were standing, in which they
were to "imagine, but don'tdo it, imagine that you are about
to take a step forward with your left foot What is the
difference? As you were. Imagine ... (repeat). Imagine that
you are about to take a step with your right foot Your le~
Right Left. Standing."
At this point, small smiles sometimes appeared on
people's faces and I suspected they felt the effect They had
gone on an imaginary walk and had felt their weight respond-
ing subtly (but really) to the image; so when "Standing" was
said, the smiles revealed that they got the small joke. They
realized that I knew about the effect We had arrived at an
invisible (but real) place together.
The stand was useful. The basic event was standing and
observing the body. This was an exercise in itself, though
a very reductive one. What gets exercised in there, inside the
standing body, is the habit of observation; a noticeable
movement of consciousness through the body. Within this
exercise there are encounters with parts of the body which
tick along or breathe along as we watch. It clearly seems to
be one sub-system, consciousness, examining others.
The other sub-systems are not obviously connected to the
wandering consciousness, except that the encounter happens
in what one calls "my body." The consciousness-as-observer
regards the other sub-systems as separate from itself.
The consciousness can travel inside the body. It is
analogous to focusing the eyes in the external world. There
is also an analogue for peripheral vision, which is the
awareness of the whole body with senses open. Knowing
these things and practicing them are different things, of
course. We know far more than we can practice. We had to
decide what to practice.
Volume 18 1993
One choice was the tiny movements the body makes while
standing. I felt they were examples of reflex actions. They
were not directed by the observing consciousness. Observ-
ing them might train the consciousness to understand reflex
speed without going through an emergency experience which
is when we're most often aware of our reflexes.
We would be provided with many examples of reflex
action when we began improvising in contact, but they might
be of little use to us, because the consciousness can easily
turn off to the experience of these reflexive moments. In
other words, we can do something without "knowing" it.
This successfully preserves the integrity of the body but does
not train the consciousness; it leaves a hole in the knowing
of the experience. Could the consciousness learn to see these
gaps of awareness? Or, if not, could it at least learn to
observe reflexive action calmly during the highly adrenalized
moments?
Why is fall consciousness so important to me? Because
consciousness can be felt to change according to what it
experiences. If a gap of consciousness occurs at a critical
moment, we lose an opportunity to learn from the moment.
A black-out lasting fractions of a second during a roll is not
acceptable as full consciousness of the roll, and the gap will
remain embedded in the movement as part of the over-all
feeling of the movement. If consciousness stays open during
these critical moments, it will have an experience of them,
and will enlarge its concept to match the new experience.
This expanded picture becomes the new ground for moving.
_My s_pecuh!tion is that _ the gaps are mo01~n!S_ Vlh~n
consciousness goes away. I don't know where. But I think
I know why. Something is happening which is too fast for
thought. For instance, the navigation of space is normally
done with bead erect and visual impressions comfortably
constant, with the horizon's horizontality remaining an
important reference for our orientation. When this visual
reference changes too rapidly for our (rather slow) conscious-
ness to comprehend, as in spinning, rolling, and other
"disorienting" movement, something reflexive and much
faster than consciousness takes over. We play with this dual
aspect of ourselves on carnival rides, or when learning to turn
in dance.
Dizziness and nausea are, I think, signals that we have
reached the borderland between these two aspects of physical
control-conscious and reflexive. When we linger in the
borderland on purpose, we become our own experiment. We
are subjecting the reflexes to stimuli so our consciousness can
watch them jump. Normally, consciousness easily slips out,
Volume 18 1993
reflexes step in, and then step aside again, as in the blink of
an eye where most of the time we are unaware of any gap in
our visual continuity.
Visual continuity is one of many ways we know "where
we are," and not knowing where we are is experienced as an
emergency situation. How many times a day, or an hour, do
we re-orient, I wonder. At any rate, contact improvisation
constantly challenges one's orientation: visual, directional,
balance, and where in the body the consciousness is posi-
tioned. The challenge to orientation is not just in the more
acrobatic aspects of the movement. Students were sometimes
made nauseous by noticing their internal space while standing
still. This, oddly enough, is probably a form of motion-
sickness, which bas been described as having a moving deck
under one's feet but a steady horizon. In the stand, one
experiences still feet and moving consciousness inside the
body. In rolling or turning, the room seems (from the point
of view of the eyes) to move, while the floor remains stable
to the touch. What I bad to do was resolve the problem of
orientation so that the consciousness could stay aware of the
movement. A chicken and egg problem.
Everyone in this group was athletic and many of them
were dancers, so presumably their consciousness bad already
been informed by body movement. But they weren't being
asked to do what they knew bow do to. They were being
asked to improvise; to do (or allow themselves to do) what
they didn't expect to do. Under these circumstances previ-
ously learned movement techniqq.es often hamper rather than
help the desired sort of manifestation. Movement techniques
are useful for other reasons, of course, but not for examining
gaps of consciousness during unexpected movement.
Consciousness, supported by a collection of images and
internal ob'servations which reinforced each other, had a job.
It should not press the body, nor engage in time travel out
of the body into memories or schedules because these bring
images which will also affect the body, distracting from the
improvisation at band. In this improvisation the conscious-
ness was to hang in with the body, during real time, and stay
alert. It should be a witness.
This sort of consciousness-awareness of the present
physical reality-is familiar to all of us. In fact the reason
it is useful is that it is commonly understood, though employ-
ing it requires choices. Without a process of sorting we are
confronted with such a variety of current physical images that
we are inundated rather than guided into a practice.
CQ/CI Sourcebook '1S7
As the right kind of images were found, a working model
began to emerge in my mind. The working model was based
on aspects of an experience that I'd had while working with
another person, in which an interesting event occurred and
was confirmed by both of us. Moments of the duet, typically
manifesting as "accidental" and flowing streams of move-
ment, were for both of us pleasant, highly stimulating, and
elemental. With other partners, more confirmations. It was
worth pursuing.
The working model was predicated on this experience and
a desire to articulate the experience so others could find it.
If others did find it, we were perhaps examining a basic
mode of communication between the reflexes of people in
physical contact as they moved. It was an idea which took
two people to have. It wasn't wrestling, embracing, sex,
social dancing, though it was an element of all of those. It
needed a name, so we could refer to it without unwanted
connotations. Contact Improvisation ... ?
To envision the exercises, I took the working model to be
a simple imaginary person with no physical, sensorial, or
social inhibitions. It was a generic person with positive
elements I had observed in many students, dancers, martial
artists, and children. I had met such a being in my partners
when we were doing "it," the duet phenomenon. I had been
such a being to them, apparently,. when they too confirmed
the moment. It had to be a fairly simple model, because the
users (the students and I) were actually functioning human
beings with more possible neuronal connections than there are
particles in the universe. I could not cope with that of
course, nor other evident human complexities. In terms of the
safety of the body in active interaction with another body,
though, I saw I could ask the student to concentrate on
movement and how it feels, and then suggest concentrating
on the sensations of their weight, momentum, friction, the
touch of their partner, the sensation of the floor under their
body, and to learn to maintain their peripheral vision of the
space. The working model had these characteristics and
others equally easy to understand These were aimed at
security, not at improvising. I recall saying that improvising
could not be taught, though it could be learned.
But I did think that safety could be taught "Keep your
knees over your toes," for instance, is taught to students of
dance. With the characteristics of the working model
developed and understood by the students, I hoped they
would be safe even if they were ass-over-teakettle.
I pressed on. I made assumptions. I assumed I could
explain things directly to the body ("notice gravity"). I
assumed the body knew what I was talking about (gravity,
usually ignored, moves into focus as a sensation of weight).
I assumed that the body, having evolved for millions of
years on this planet, was tuned first by planetary things which
create our potentials, and second by cultural things which
develop select parts of the potential. This is in line with
some current theories about how we acquire language; we are
born with potential to make the variety of human sounds and
language connections, but are guided into the specific
language of our culture, and the unused potential withers with
disuse.
For the working model, the basic question was-potential
for what? What had the culture physically suppressed or
selected out which we might reclaim? We may, with a bit of
experience of sub-cultures of our own, and other cultures,
understand something of what our culture requires of us for
inclusion: certain gestures, modes of posture and behav-
ior-body language, as they say-which constitute proper
social activities and communications, as well as the accompa-
nying mental attitudes we acquire or aspire to for proper
presentation of our 'selves'. Indeed, the very idea of a 'self
is probably a cultural construction.
In sports and dance the rules of physical behavior are
altered from the basic social behaviors to encompass activities
understood to be outside the social norm but allowable in a
controlled way. These activities require different sensing
modes than does the usual body language we must learn for
eating in company or attending school. The working model
and its characteristics were like sports and dance in that they
were altered. However, they depart from one another in how
they are learned. Contact Improvisation behavior evolves
from sensing movement; dance and sports, from attempting
movement and then letting the senses fall into line, or not.
"517t+£<~\t;.i'ri..,
'S ? A<..€.
As to how we are educated... Not to become too em-
broiled in this, we may simply note that most of us learn to
sit still and focus our attention for hours each day. The
missing potential here is obvious - movement of the body and
varieties of peripheral sensing.
Our alterations involved the investigation of space, time,
and mass with senses in peripheral sensing mode: space
becomes spherical, time is the present, mass is a changeable
orientation to gravity.
In devising an approach to this working model of the
body, I skipped blithely by constraints and taboos of touch-
ing, because people are accustomed to ignoring them on the
subway, during sports, or in the doctor's office. And I did not
emphasize the unpredictable nature of the improvisation, akin
to dancing on constantly shifting ground, but suggested
instead a steady state of watching the reflexes. Let the
reflexes figure out how to deal with the unpredictable.
This method aimed to reclaim physical possibilities which
may have become dormant, senses we have been trained to
disregard. What would this lead to, really? It sounds very
nice, this reclaiming and opening, but where would these
changes take us? Who would we be?
When we began, in 1972, I went boldly into all this. The
people in the group were young, healthy, and alert I
assumed that if we didn't consciously focus on problems we
wouldn't create them, and at least such difficulties as
258 CQICI Sourcebook
Volume 18 1993
surfaced would not have been projected. As I said earlier,
things seemed simpler then.
It was to be assumed that some of these students would
eventually teach something of what they were doing to
others, and I felt the need to develop this material in such a
way that the students were aware of the teaching mecha-
nisms. It boiled down to making the principles-physical,
mental, and cultural-known to them as they learned them.
We had the services of Steve Christiansen and his video
camera and spent hours, when we were not working on the
mat, examining the movement and ourselves, the movers.
· This was very useful. Video was, in those days, a new
tool for witnessing the body/mind, and let us see points in
action when we were operative but not conscious. Such
moments, noticed with the help of the videotape or close
observation by a partner, could later be examined in action.
Clues about the nature of the gap might be noticed. We
began to notice where the gaps appeared, at any rate, and
something of their frequency. We also noticed high unfet-
tered moments (and recalled the accompanying feelings).
And we observed fettered duets where reflexive movement
was not to be seen. Sometimes people seemed wary, unable
to let go of conscious control. Disorientation, fear, or fixed
habitual responses would be noticed.
In the working model, events of the emotions and disori-
entations which were felt in conjunction with a gap in
awareness were considered to be symptomatic that the senses
wer~ not ~uite ready to--report what was happening to the
consciousness, that instead they were reporting to the
reflexive part of the mind and body.
I couldn't understand the wary duets. Obviously trust was
missing. With some other partner or on some other day, this
tended to change. All I could do to cope with this mode was
to have partners change regularly. Eventually everyone found
a duet which led them to their reflexes.
When I proposed movement techniques they sometimes
contravened ingrained movement habits: for instance, the
aikido roll, which is a diagonally forward roll that arrived on
our shores from the Orient. At the very attempt at this roll,
students translated it into a somersault, the symmetrical
forward roll we learn in Western movement. This misunder-
standing could persist through any number of repetitions of
examples and attempts and was seriously frustrating to both
the students and me. If they couldn't put their finger on what
was going wrong, I decided, it was perhaps because nothing
in previous movement experience had prepared them for the
movement principles which were developed in the Eastern
martial arts.
These repeated attempts at the aikido roll provided the
first gap I noticed. The act of propelling the body into the
roll is slightly scary, and many people have open eyes before
and after the roll, but in the moment when they are taking
weight on their neck and shoulders, they have their eyes
squeezed shut, and they are not aware that this is so.
I did not solve this two-part problem in time for the first
performance, nor for many years after, though the students
did perfect their somersaults.
I learned that before the body could find the new rolling
Volume 18 1993
pattern it was useful for it to learn the sensations which an
aikido roll creates.
The new sensations, and the parts of the arm, shoulder,
and back where the sensations arise in the roll, could be
explored without committing the whole body to the roll. This
changed the position of the consciousness relative to the
exercise. Instead of an unknown action vs. an habitual
known action which is so similar that it subverts the attempt,
the student has two knowable actions. One is new, tentative,
but understood through the sensorial model. The other is
habitual. Having remedied the first difficulty by establishing
the difference between the two concepts of rolling, the gaps
of consciousness in either could be ferreted out.
These explorations evolved into new technical approaches.
It was noticeable that the approaches require that the student
workwith helpfolmental attitudes as-wellas-directly with the
physical body. In the aikido roll example above, it was less
helpful to know the pattern mentally and try willfully to do
it than it was to become an observer of the sensations and to
work calmly on each emotional, orientational, or habitual
block as it arose.
The quality of consciousness was coming into focus. It.
wasn't all of consciousness and all possible interactions, of
course. A working model for consciousness in this case is
Swiss cheese. We buy it as a lump, and don't attend to the
holes because we don't use them. I was trying to point to the
holes, assuming that if a Swiss cheese could be aware of
itself, then the cheesy part was one sort of consciousness and
the holes were another sort, integral to the shape, the nature
of the whole cheese. We can't take this model much further,
I realize; which may be to the advantage of getting on with
the movement and its interaction with the consciousness.
As we began work on opening up the senses to their
larger potential, it became clear that each of the senses has
images of differing natures. The Swiss cheese above, mostly
a visual image in that I am concentrating on how the cheese
looks, occurred in my brain and was transferred to another
person by my voice, so it was a verbal transmission of a
visual image. What was most needed in our work was
kinetic imagery which was both appropriate to the movement
mode and true (unlike the speculation about the consciousness
of the cheese).
The small movements of standing "still," which formed
the basis of this sort of investigation, are true; they are really
there. But are they images or sensations? If we observed
them, would they filter through the observing mind and affect
CQ/CI Sourcebook 259
the body as images do? Does the nervous system and its
mediation of posture relative to gravity have the possibility
of teaching the consciousness, and does the consciousness
have the property of amplifying or strengthening that media-
tion?
I assumed this reciprocity did exist I decided that
sensations are what we feel to be happening at the moment,
and they can become images when we take notice that we are
observing them. This suggests that the consciousness can be
aware of itself-a defining characteristic-and that there is a
positive use for this ability to split into self-regard. However,
consciousness doesn't work very well with the unknown, as
was revealed in the aikido roll. It seems to need to know or
to be noticing in order to direct itself and the body. The
attitude of "witnessing" may change this internal control
issue. The search for internal sensations reveals that "I can
feel the small movements." Then our attitude begins to shift
toward, "The body is kept upright by constant reflexive
muscular actions around the skeleton." First we feel the
movements, then we can objectify the feelings into images.
The moment between these perceptions can be as short as a
hyphen. All the above suggests that there is an important
difference between knowing-noticing and noticing-knowing.
These are the sorts of thoughts which came to mind
during the working period from January to June, 1972. Or to
say it in terms of the work: from Magnesium at Oberlin
College through the spring term at Bennington College where
we further identified the premise, the phenomenon, to the
presentation of the work in NYC I called "contact improvisa-
tions." Students from those two institutions (plus members
of the downtown dance community in NYC who "sat in")
were joined by students from the classes of Mary Fulkerson
at the U. or' Rochester. The Rochester group was least
familiar with the proposed movement, and as Fulkerson was
teaching them Release Technique via intensive image work,
it was in order to reach these students quickly that the
approach outlined above was developed beyond what had
been necessary at Bennington College.
At Bennington, I had begun by introducing these students
of Western dance to Aikido techniques. However, I soon
abandoned teaching Aikido and started work on specific tools
for the interior techniques. Although physical techniques
could be found for specific movement training, what those
students required was a vision of Eastern martial arts philoso-
phy underlying the techniques (or a viable replacement for
that). This laid the ground for introducing an improvisation
which requires a state of personal involvement and physical
responsibility with/for another person.
260 CQ/CI Saurcebook
It must be pointed out that many of the ideas about
moving which I used existed before this study. The teach-
ings of Release Technique, Aikido, and several other physical
and mental disciplines were influential, and were adjusted
according to my understanding at the time in order to convey
the movement principles of the area of improvisation de-
scribed by the words contact improvisation.
Beyond that, to enable the movement to be accomplished
safely, came physical exercises designed to introduce sensa-
tions that arise during "flying," lifting, and being lifted. and
to physically strengthen the body for these energetic extremes
of the form. Physical strength was seen as the result of
finding the right, i.e., easiest, most efficient inner "pathways."
Stress was discouraged.
We were starting to work on the technical method, a work
which continues today, in an effort to describe what Contact
Improvisation is on its own terms as a phenomenon of duet
movement as well as in the personal terms of a student, who
may for instance have physical strength but spatial weakness,
or improvisational skills but does not trust their weight to
another person.
To summarize: images were used to focus the mind and
then give the mind foci within the sensations of the body.
The words had to be unambiguous, unthreatening, infor-
mative and generally understood.
The statements had to be true, obvious, relevant.
To speak was a.lso to ~ettheton(!. I trieci to simplify the
issues of the body for transmission to another body. I moved
the mind of my mouth into my body, located issues, and
reported the issues speaking (I assumed) directly to another
body. The student's consciousness was enlisted to manage
attitudes and observe the effect of image on the body, and to
derive from these effects, and others observed within their
bodies, images which could be named and otherwise objecti-
fied and discussed, and fitted into the improvisational
structure.
I made a number of assumptions. To study something
like improvisation, which is defined as you go, everything
you assume is going to affect the result I tried to be aware
of what the assumptions were and to let the phenomenon we
explored, the narrower field of improvisation when commu-
nicating via touch with another person, guide the definitive
imagery into appropriate areas.
This guidance caused us to consider all sorts of things,
such as communication, emotion, psychology, sex, education,
childhood development, culture, taboos, space, time, and the
self. It is all very well to say that one takes responsibility for
one's self in improvisation, but it is indeed a staggering job
in its details. An improvisor's job is never done. All this to
explore the ability of the consciousness to cleave to the
body's moment and remain there as the moment changes.*
for John Cage
Volume 18 1993
CQ coeditors and producers Nancy Stark Smith and Lisa Nelson, Fall 1984