----------------

LOOKING WHERE WE LEAP

When my friend Susan's four-year-old
son, Ev, starts a sentence with,
know, mumma...
It seems to signal an epiphany of some
sort, like, "You know, mumma, the
And it says some very
sensible things. People who do bad
things can't hear it. And that's the
problem." Or while swinging in the
playground with his head back, looking
up at the sky, "You know, mumma...the
air is a kind of ground too.
ent than the ground earth has.
things happen there too... miracles!"
What Ev sees, or rather, how he sces,
is a natural mechanism that many danc-
ers spend years disarming themselves to
find. Some go into empty rooms with a
witness, close their eyes and wait 'til
they feel an impulse to move and then
follow it. Others are sparked into action
by ideas, thought forms, and images.
Others find the movement of their muse
turned on by connecting to another
person through touch-being moved
either through outer space as in contact
improvisation, or through inner space as
in hands-on bodywork.
In this issue of CQ alone, there are as
many ways to approach movement as
there are artists represented. I love the
way Steve Paxton tries to disseet and
reassemble the micro-movements of his
thinking in relation to his use of imag-
ery in launching Contact Improvisation
20 years ago.
I'm excited by the at-
tempts in CQ to track and express in
writing the movement of our minds and
bodies in our work. It's not an easy
task, but the challenge to keep the
movement going through this often too-
flat medium is a nut worth cracking.

For one thing, it might feed more peo-
This little magazine travels further
through space and time than most of the
dances it speaks of. It could easily
happen that, for instance, Deborah
Hay's practice of lying on her back and
"changing "ceiling' to 'lifetime of ceil.
ing'' could ring a significant bell ten
years from now in some Australian's
car. That's a big long dance.
I'd like to bring your attention to a
peculiar truth that currently exists: Con-
tact Quarterly is, at the moment, neither
quarterly nor a magazine about Contact
Improvisation. This may be obvious to
many of you and surprising, even
shocking, to others. Though there's
something appealing to me about keep-
ing the name and just changing inside it,
our continuing to use the name Contact
Quarterly for this magazine is more
than misleading, it's becoming a real
pain in the neck: too many subscribers
are wondering if they've missed some
issues, and many would-be subscribers
are missing out altogether because they
think they have to do Contact Improvi-
sation to read CQ. This journal you
now touch and that touches you, is
somewhere between Contact Quarterly
and a new place.
One of my dancing curiosities of late
has been focused on the life cycle of
form in improvised movement-how
form is first perceived, recognized,
pursued and how it changes.
happens when individual fragments of
awareness add up to the perception of a
unity, offering an overall shape, charac-
ter or form to the present activity. Is it

possible to perceive forms for which we
have no conscious reference, to perceive
a unity arising that we've never felt
before? And supposing it is possible,
can we also consciously perceive its
decay, dis-integration, end, with the
same clarity, even excitement, with
which we experienced it "coming to-
gether"? How, from within the apparent
lack of form, can we see the new orga-
nizing structure emerge? This is one
thing in dancing, and it is the same in
making this magazine.
Contact Quarterly's first year of life
was as a Sx/year typewritten xcroxed
Contact Newsletter, circulated among
the nationally scattered group of teach-
ers and practitioners of Contact Impro-
visation. It then went through 3 years
of being a 4x/yr Contact Quarterly, still
largely by, for, and about Contact Im-
provisers and their work, and proceeded
through 13 years of a 3x/yr Contact
Quarterly stretching further each issue
into new realms within the contempo-
rary dance and movement arts arena.
Meanwhile, we continue to be a vehicle
for the CI community as well as for the
expanding dance community that has
gathered within and around CQ's cov-
ers. It is probably true that Contact
Quarterly today is more about contact
inspiration than contact improvisation.
Though I personally have been and
continue to be deeply involved in Con-
tact Improvisation, the "Contact" in
Contact Quarterly has for me always
been essentially about contact, ex-
change, between people whose bodies
and minds are moving.
The desire to remain curious, to lear
and exchange, has brought us to this
particular juncture: We are a biannual
movement journal called Contact Quar-
terly that has grown past the borders of
its name. This apparent disjuncture will
The dissonance created is
enough to cause us to listen up, and to
question who we are as we move for-
"I really like your purple top and
slacks," Ev said to his nearly deaf and
blind 105-year-old grandmother. And
then, turning to his mom, "You know,
mumma, her top is really pretty, but
that's not what's important. What's
really important is the body under-
neath."

by Nancy Stark Smit


----------------

NEWS FROM VENEZUELA

The 4th Festival de Danza Posmoderna
in Caracas, Venezuela was held from
February 3 to March 14, 1992. A total
of 11 dance artists from the U.S., Eu-
rope, and Venezuela were invited to
contribute their teaching and perform-
ing. These included myself, Marguerita
Guergue, Jackie Shue, Karen Nelson,
K.J. Holmes, Ishmael Houston Jones,
Lance Gries, Bo Madvig, David Zam-
brano, Paco Macia and Jeremy Nelson.
The festival is funded by the Consejo
Nacional de la Cultura, Venezucla, the
Suitcase Fund of Dance Theatre Work-
shop in New York, the Rockefeller
Foundation, and various schools and
companies in and outside of Caracas,
who actively involve their staff and
students.
I was curious about the growth of
*new dance' and 'post-modem' dance in
Venezuela, since I had been there last in
1962 (l) dancing with the José Limon
Company. I had always wanted to go
back.
David Zambrano, Venezuelan danc-
cr-performer, based in New York but
working all over the globe, is the motor
and the heart of this yearly festival. All
during the festival, David's spirit and
energy were truly remarkable, whether
picking up newly arrived guest teachers,
translating interviews, showing the
whereabouts of studios in the city, or
buying groceries, David would be there
and take care of things with elegance.
David runs the fectival in close
collaboration with the Instituto Superior
de Danza, a school that offers ballet and
modern dance classes, for beginners to
professionals, and is the birthplace of
several Caracas-based dance companies.
The Instituto, located in a busy, dirty,
industrial arce,
with noisy traffic,
formed an axis far teachers and students
in the late afternoon, to meet and talk.
It was like an oasis, with its white walls
and large tropical piants. The school
publishes its own magazine, La Danza,
for which the guests were interviewed
This year the Instituto celebrated its
10th anniversary.
The format of the festival is an open
work form. Schools and companies that
offer traditional ballet and modern dance
classes during the year open their doors
to otherwise inaccessible ways of dance
making, techniques, skills, improvisa-
tion, and choreography. David claims
that his dedication to improvisation
comes from not being able to remember
set choreography, but I suspect that it
originates with the salsa in his blood,
and as such is at the root of the creative
approach of this festival. The learning
situation is a creative one; students are
stimulated to think, feel, and sense, to
explore and expand their own resources.
A strong factor in the success of this
format seems to be the students' enthu-
siasm and desire for this self-emancipa-
tory information. They are not shy and
show an eagerness to understand and
experience the body in new ways.
For the guest artists there is a cross-
fertilization between the open, direct,
and very physical, tropical energy (of
the salsa) and the listening-to-the-body
as a basis for action, underlying the so-
called post-modern work. Inspired by
the students, I wanted to learn the salsa
and was surprised how easily the moves
just seemed to come from the earth and
the music once you set foot on the
dance floor.
In the various attempts by the news-
papers to clarify the issue of "what is
'post-modern dance"?", there was never
o n e a n s w e r. The invited artists, with
their individual qualities, perhaps have
one thing in common: the search for
their own forms of dance, and perfor-
mance of improvisation as part of that
quest. The students I worked with were
young and showed a remarkable open-
ness for experimenting with new ways
of thinking about the body and/or han-
ding movement. It was exciting when
I would communicate (in Spanish) ideas
such as coming to a sense of breathing
and widening in the movement, rather
than going from position to position,
and I saw a clear change in their movement .
In a warm-up before class, one of
the girls from the company wanted to
know whether I was teaching them a
special method of warming up. Since 1
don't believe in "method," or "style"
with a patent on it, I answered with a
thoughtful "no," but further explained
that the practice of lying on the floor,
"seeing" the spine from the inside,
allowing weight to fall and spread with
gravity and breathing, freeing the joints
and "thinking spaco" into the body's
structure, all within the first exercises,
are a conditioning for a state of sensitiv-
ity of the mind/body. So, I actually
could have said "yes." Seen from more
traditional dance training, in which the
body's outward condition and shape is
the first concern, such a way of working
could be seen as a different approach or
My performance at the end of the
third week, TWO TRACKS, needed to
be structured into its Caracas form.
David found me an excellent saxophon-
ist to work with, Rodolpho Reyes.
enjoyed the change of genre that Rodol-
pho presented me with, his background
being more classically jazzy or melodic
than Luc Houtkamp's, the Dutch saxo-
phonist I work with, whose sound I hear
as more rugged, non-melodic and textur-
al-two totally different worlds.
found a workable form in Rodolpho's
using my movement as a score. He
needed to know durations and I asked
him not to follow my dynamic, but to
only have landmarks and stillnesses and
build his own dynamic, so that we could
each create our own track. This version
of TWO TRACKS became a relentless
dance and music piece; no plot, no
story, just movement and music in dia-
logue through silences. And slightly
abstractly humorous.
I completed my stay in Venezuela
with a few days off in a small beach
village, down the coastal mountains
north of Caracas. Huge birds, diving
for fish, swallows the size of the largest
seagulls of the North Sca, a blue sky
and a blazing hot sun on an almost
empty beach with the clearest water and
coconut palms for shade, these were the
surroundings. One free soul climbing a
palm tree with hands and fect, came
down with a large green coconut, which
he offered me to drink. Swimming and
sunning, I drank more than a volume of
inspiration for new events.

Amsterdam, Holland
August, 1992

by Pauline de Groot

----------------

REMEMBERING IRMGARD

When I saw Irmgard Bartenieff's
photograph in Contact Quarterly
last year, a shiver of delight ran
through my body. I again felt her
vitality and life energy. I was
reminded that perhaps there might
be many readers for whom the
picture would also revive mero-
ries...and also many readers who
could only marvel at the curious
woman in the pictures, but might
not actually have been touched by
her.
For the last five years I have
been writing a book about my own
work with Bartenieff Fundamen-
tals! One chapter in the book is
about my memories of working
with Irmgard. What follows are
excerpts from this chapter. I offer
them in hopes that people who have
studied Fundamentals and those
who haven't will be inspired to
know that the life of one individual
does make a lasting difference in
this everchanging world. Irmgard
is part of our collective history as
movers. If you are concerned about
"connectivity" in your own body,
you have received an inheritance
from Irmgard.

Rudolf von Laban's seminal
work in the first half of this century
identified and illuminated the con-
cepts of Effort, Space, Shape, Action
of Body Parts, and Group Relation-
ships as elements which describe how
human beings express themselves
through movement. But until his
student, Iringard Bartenleff, brought
the perspective of her own work from
physical therapy to the Laban frame-
work, the Laban work lacked a full
body component. Emphasizing the
importance of internal body connectivity
in making movement come alive both
within the individual and out in the
world was Irmgard's unique contribu-
ton to this work
The field of Laban Movement Stud-
les has broadened immeasurably since
her pioneering work, but it was cer-
tainly her "touch" which initiated
within the field a curiosity about the
possibilities of the interconnection of
self to self, self to other and self to
world. She ignited the exploratory
fire. And because "Information" does
not exist without the filter of the per-
son through which that information is
given, Irmgard's own personal quali-
ties became part of what one values
and studies in Bartenieff Fundamen-
tals today. Since I am not a historian,
I will provide insights from my own
and others' personal memories rather
than attempt a strict historical ap-
proach.
Irmgard was a spry 67 years old
when I met her in 1967. Because I
was a psychology major, Lucy Ven-
able, then president of the Dance
Notation Bureau where I had gone to
finish my certification in Labanota-
tion, sald, "If you're interested in how
people express themselves, you
should study Effort-Shape."
gard was the master teacher of it at
the time, I essentially apprenticed
myself to this sprightly young-old
woman for the next nearly 15 years,
until her death in 1981.
I am reminded again and again of
a typical scene...

In my mind's eye I see Irmgard,
with her grey hair tied back by a pastel
chiffon scarf at the nape of her neck.
My memory lens opens more and I see
we are involved in one of our on-going
discussions about movement, exploring
connections within the body. Sudden-
ly, she springs alive with a new
thought. Her seemingly frail body
becomes immensely energized as her
expressive hands begin pouring out and
around, gently touching a murititude of
places in the air, spreading and open-
ing as she says, "Well, you see, there
are many possibilities!...
* Her eyes
are twinkling and her head tilting
expectantly, as if the complex interrela-
tionships indicated by her round, all-
encompassing gesture are enough to
convey the totality of her thought. She
is waiting for me to respond, eager and
childlike, waiting for me to "take the
ball and run with it.
At these moments I felt inspired,
ready to open myself to take in more,
to feel the mystery, the potential, the
moving connection between things.
thoughts, bodies—-whatever we were
discussing. She would elaborate, I
would follow, playing in her swirling
thoughts.
We had a delightful, accepting
relationship. We were like grand par-
ent/ grandchild colleagues. Each of us
was allowed to be who we were in
our eccentric imperfect way yet with
maximum love and appreciation. 

I came into the Laban work young, at
age 18, and was already steeped in
the structural side of the system,
Labanotation, by the time I met Irm-
gard when I was 22. Other people in
the early Effort-Shape training group
were a bit older than I and viewed
Irmgard as a mother, sometimes
good, sometimes bad. What they saw
as the "Bad Mother" (the one who
was confusing and somewhat non-
revealing and non-validating yet
always implying *You can do
more...there is more to learn,") only
spurred me on to find my own per-
sonal clarity to bring to my co-teach-
ing with her. She could then be free
to do her global-thought-wanderings,
following her rich, intuitive, indirect
process through the class, and I could
be counted on to follow up with pin-
pointed questions or succinct explana-
tions. Now, twenty years later, I find
myself revelling in the broad implica-
tions of movement training. wanting
to work at the meaning level, and
being less interested in specific drills
or one-facet descriptions. Perhaps it
Is a stage in the creative process or
perhaps it is an inheritance part of
the "genetic line."
Irmgard was an integration of what
might at first seem to be a mass of
polar opposites-a magical child
springing into the air unexpectedly
and a wizened old woman padding
around the Laban Institute in house-
shoes...a delicate frail-looking assem-
blage of bones capable of yanking
students around with fierce power...a
highly poetic spirit delving into analy-
sis of specific joint functions. She was
eager to know all, and impatient that
all was not already known. Her eyes
were alive, bright, and sparkling in
one moment, her face drained, in
need of replenishment, in the next.

She was highly discriminating yet all-
embracing of diversity.
Her lightness and indirectness
masked her inner intensity on first
viewing. She was not "easy" yet she
was also non-confrontational. To
Irmgard the point of an exercise or a
discussion was always obvious from
the movement itself. When skeptics
would bring up baiting questions
about either the movement or the
philosophy behind the movement,
rather than engage in a discussion or
argument, Irmgard would begin to
move and say something like, "But
you see, if you do it this way...*
while moving either herself or the
questioner. If the question still re-
mained, she frequently raised her
eyebrows, shrugged her shoulders
and waved away the webs of disbelief
with her hands as if to say, "Oh well,
you can think that if you want...since
you haven't yet found your answer in
the moving."
For Irmgard, movement, not more
pondering, is what brings new
knowledge. I have come to see this
as the activation of pre-conscious
knowledge and have myself recog-
nized that our bodies contain knowl-
edge which is not accessible by ordi-
nary linear intellectual probing. Mov-
ing and a willingness to perceive the
movement brings access to bodily
knowledge, or embodiment. In this
way, the feeling component of
thought is brought to life, enabling
one to experience the feeling that
connects thoughts. Frequently, mov-
ing reveals the nature of the relation-
ship between ideas-the pattern of
the contexture, or the interweaving of
parts. In her manuscript, "The Art of
Body Movement as a Key to Percep-
tion," Irmgard states: "The main object
of all this material is to suggest addi-
tional modes of perceiving yourself and
the world around you, using your live
body totally—-body/mind/feeling—as a
key to that perception. The heart of
that 'liveness' is movement and, there-
fore, it is the movement itself that we
have studied. How your body func-
tions in movement-Body/Effort/
Shape—and what that means to your
perceptions and expression."

"Activate and Motivate," the words
of her first physical therapy teacher
the late George Deaver, were passed
on to us as a motto for teaching, 
Irmgard was action oriented. She
could get almost anyone moving, yet
her teaching was certainly different
from traditional dance training,• With-
out explaining why we were to do the
movement or really how to do it, she
might explode full force, do three
stamps into the floor, run lightly for-
ward, and end in a low, wide stance
with a loud "Ha!"
We would stand incredulous,
watching this strange lady commit
herself totally and we would be al-
most dumbfounded when she would
turn around in eager expectation
wondering why we weren't already
moving. (Most of us dancer-types
were waiting to get the counts and be
told some technical aspect to attempt.
These were not forthcoming.) Then
she would yell, "Well, do itl" and we
would be galvanized into action...
stamping, running, and jumping into
a squat, "Ha!" At this point we were
still mystified as to exactly what all of
this would do for us, but were some-
how willing to attempt it in the belief
that there was an underlying method
to be discovered. We had been
trained to imitate, but Irmgard dis-
couraged that. "My movement is not
for you to imitate, but to speak to
you, to get you started."* She moti-
vated us consistently through Effort—
through images and the dynamic
quality of her voice-but she might
not at that moment indicate what
connections to notice. For example,
why, in terms of "body connectivity,"
were we using the strong/direct effort
"Hal"? Only gradually did we make
the conscious association that using
the weight effort facilitates the proces
of finding the heel-sitz bone connec-
tion. This connection, in tum, facili-
tates a stable grounded state, which
provides a foundation for lower
body/upper body integration.
Years later in a certification faculty
meeting, Irmgard enjoined us as
teachers to provide a class that is
"fully rich in experiencing contrasts
rather than sorting out concepts. It
(the class) should be evocative in the
moment rather than teaching' theo-
retical material. It should send high
energy into a physical concentration.
Irmgard's classes were full of large
total body movement! Later genera-
tions of teachers of Fundamentals
stressed the floor exercises as the
prime definers of Fundamentals, but I
almost never experienced an entire
class of Irmgard's lying on the floor.
We took time to go "inside" but then
we worked with moving through
space, experiencing shape change in
each plane, using our voices as a rich
support. We definitely spent time on
the floor, but we always "played" in a
very dynamic way with our own
expression in the environment. Irm-
gard knew that adults need time to
go back to the "baby" patterns, but
that the real change is confirmed in
the personal phrasing that occurs
within the context of one's own life,
integrating the new connection into
larger movements.
Effort, Shape, and Space are all
inroads to neuromuscular repat-
terning. In almost every class that
Irmgard taught, there were wide
swings in dynamic range and in spa-
tial complexity. We were vibrating
with our sounding, and we were
flying and falling! I was astounde
the first time I saw Irmgard come
from a running start and dive into the
floor on a diagonal. She claimed that
she was "riding the kite tension" and
added, "the space will hold you." I
had my doubts, but decided that if
someone nearly 50 years older could
do it, so could I. After a couple of
bruised knees I discovered that, in-
deed, clear spatial intent to ride the
diagonal would open pathways to a
motor pattern for the body to fulfill
that intent. I was hooked into this
way of training-Action! Moving
with intent is the key.
I entered Irmgard's classes as a
dancer, along with many therapists,
anthropologists, and educators, be-
cause we all wanted to move and
know about movement in a way that
connected us to ourselves and to
other human beings.
Irmgard was a founder of the
American Dance Therapy Association
and was acutely aware of the psycho-
logical implications of movement.
After watching a client/therapist
interaction from behind a one-way
screen, she frequently astonished the
doctors at the hospital of the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine by pre-
dicting new progress in therapy sev-
eral sessions in advance of its con-
scious emergence in the verbal cli-
ent/therapist interaction.
Observing the movement of one-
self or others is a touchstone to
knowledge. This is a simple state-
ment with profound implications for
our society.
Irmgard was constantly learning,
because she was constantly perceiving
movement. She taught us to do the
same-to do as Laban said simply,
"to pay more attention to human
movement-bodily and mental
which is obviously at the basis of all
human activity.*" This enchantment
with perceiving movement led to her
willingness to experience what was
happening with a particular client and
be excited about what was there to
work with, rather than conoelving in
advance what "should" be there.
When 1 asked George Bartenieff,
Irmgard's son, what he thought set
Irmgard apart, he said, "Well, other
therapists are always trying to fix
people. She never tried to fix anyone.
To her, working with someone was
like an adventure the two of them
were on together. She was fascinate
and curious about what would happen.
Practitioners of Fundamentals who
are also psychotherapists frequently
utilize movement within the context
of a verbal therapy session. Con-
versely, movement therapists often
spend quite a bit of time within a
session encouraging the client to ver-
balize feelings which are coming up
in the movement. I do not practice
therapy, but in the Fundamentals
classroom, I encourage students to
bring movement-engendered feeling
to a conscious level either to share out
loud or to record in their own jounals. 
I believe in integrating the pre-
conscious and the conscious. Irm-
gard, however, rarely did this either
within a class or a private session.
When I once asked her what she did
with psychological "ahal"s which
came up during a session, she said in
a deliberate voice, as If casting a spell,
"We go back to the movement." This
dedication to action over verbalizing
was ever present. Activate and Moti-
vate!
Irmgard's motivational skill has
already been mentioned, but it needs
further discussion. In talking with
fitness trainers and aerobics teachers
from the New York Sports Training
Institute?, Irmgard stressed the impor-
tance of stimulating the movement
motivation for repetitive skill-oriented
tasks-not just warming muscles or
falling into "the mistake of the ma-
chines." In jumping. for instance, for
it to be effective body training there
must be "the desire to jump like 2-
year-old children—really jump with
joy! Animate people more to move
and out of that comes the desire to
And how is that done? A nearly
sure-fire way is to involve more of
who they are. For some people this
may mean involving their vocalization
to engender full breath and dynamic
aliveness. For others it might be
finding a poetic image that feels per-
sonally right, for others perhaps it
might be the proprioceptive inroad of
touch. Still others need to be told the
principle they are working on an
then be left alone to problem-solve.
Irmgard's motivational gift was to
know instinctively which to use.
Somewhere in my training in Psychol-
ogy, I remember reading a famous
experiment where images of partial
circles were briefly flashed on a
screen and subjects were to indicate
what they had seen. A huge percent-
age completed the figure in their own
brains and said they had seen "a
circle." Sometimes I feel Irmgard's
somewhat secretive nature was also a
motivator for her students. In the act
of being not quite totally revealing of
the steps in her thinking process
(which infuriated some students), she
provided a chance for students to
"complete the circle" themselves.
Irmgard also motivated through
movement which was clearly phrased,
and therefore easier for the neuro-
muscular system to perceive. In my
memory I hear her, "Te, te, te, te, da"
(four light upward steps, one widstrong 
downward one). Phrasing was
clarified through singing it. Poetic
images and metaphors were abun-
dant.."your palm is the heart of your
hand. Use it with free flow and let it
caress the air.** Or when students
were having difficulty with sustained
strength, "You are a slow Chinese
Monster!*
I can still feel the strength and
pointedness of her touch in the class-
room. She yanked, pressed, or pulled
until I was willing to do. For instance,
she didn't want me to miss the de-
lightful rotary change in the shoulder
joint that happens when doing subtle
rotation of the arm, so she yanked me
through it—a bit like a Balinese mas-
ter teacher who is determined that the
student will experience the move-
ment. With other people she guided
gently. Each was different.
In individual work with patients,
Irmgard also employed connective
tissue massage, a manual technique of
"therapeutic pull" as originated by
Frau Elizabeth Dicke (1929). It aims
at reworking the elastic movability of
different tissue layers against each
other (dermis, subcutanea, and fascia).
This aspect of actual intervention in
the tissue could release habitually
blocked areas of tension and relieve
pain, thus freeing the neuromuscular
pathways for being receptive to new
patterns. The clarity of Irmgard's
strokes could also leave propriocep-
tive messages about pathways of
connectivity which the individual
could then utilize as a movement
m o t i v a t o r.
Irmgard was not a great believer in
endless repetition for skill building (as
is frequently done in a traditional
dance technique class). She felt that
such repetition was deadening to the
personal involvement because most
repetition does not adequately em-
phasize the reinvestment of effort
energy, or personal commitment, that
Is really necessary for continued re-
creation of the movement. For this
we did repeat similar exercises or
experiences frequently within a long
series of classes.
Irmgard Bartenieff did not set out
to develop a theory of body connec-
tivity or fundamental movement
training. In fact she was not primari-
ly a theoretician. She worked with
people, with human beings. Out of
years of spontaneously adapting her
knowledge of the body, art, educa-
tion, and therapy to dealing with
hundreds of specific people, she came
to a way of working that worked for
her and addressed the concerns of the
people and the culture in which she
practiced
When I first studied with her in the
mid-1960s, the work was called "Cor-
rectives." She was coming out of a
period of doing physical therapy with
polio patients who were unable to
mobilize themselves, to get their
weight going. She had also been
working with dancers who were mus-
ele-bound and overly concerned with
making shapes, rather than moving
fully through space. And as a thera-
pist, people she worked with were
not fully functioning or were injured
and wanted help to "correct" their
condition. Our culture had not yet
rediscovered the significant role of
movement and the body in living a
full life (no one was jogging or danc-
ing for health reasons). Most people
who considered themselves intelligent
identified their intelligence as being in
their head. There was a definite
mind-body split in the cultural collec-
tive and that was coupled with a
highly goal-oriented society. This led
to a predominance of people in the
culture who were reaching for things
(ideas, thoughts, success).
This societal norm manifested in
the body as an overuse of the upper
body reach pattern, which frequently
was not supported by the push from
the lower body, or connectedness to
the ground. What polio patients
could not achieve because of illness,
others could not achieve for a multi-
tude of other reasons.
Originally, "Correctives" was re-
dressing a condition in our society at
large and in Individual members of
the society. That condition was: over
identification of ourselves with the
upper body and a dis-identification
with, indeed a deadening of, the
lower body. Addressing this upper/
lower split was of prime importance
to Irmgard, as was rediscovering a
relationship to the center of weight,
grounding, and getting the lower
body moving. This is why there is an
emphasis in her work on exercises for
the lower body and on upper/lower
connectivity through diagonal patterning
Eventually Irmgard became uncom-
fortable with the title "Correctives"
because she realized that she was
really giving people a chance to expe-
rience, or re-experience, movement
that is basic to all human beings. Her
own impulse was to confirm what is
fundamental rather than correct
something that was wrong. In the
late 1960s she began calling this work
"Fundamentals." But still there was
no written "theory."
Students pressed her to systemize
the Fundamentals work into some
standard form. Irmgard was resistant
to this because she was constantly
learning herself, and what she empha-
sized one year in her teaching might
take a whole new slant the next year,
depending on what she had been
exploring in the intervening time.
1 remember when she came back
from Hawaii and was totally en-
thralled with successive movement
through the pelvis and lower body (as
seen in the hula), or when she spent
almost an entire year stressing arm
rotation through palm facing (after
working on an anthropological pro-
ject). This was quite inspiring to me
as a budding teacher and made the
idea of teaching even more exciting.
There were definitely core prin-
ciples which she utilized, but I do not
think she ever really articulated the
full core of those fundamental truths.
I have spent many years trying to for-
mulate them clearly myself and have
a chapter in my book which deals
with my latest list of these Principles.
The list includes principles such as:
1) The whole body is connected; all
parts are in relationship; 2) Intent
patterns the neuromuscular system;
clarity of intent enables your body to
find the motor pattern to fulfill that
intent; 3) Movement happens in
phrases; the preparation and initia-
tion of the phrase determine the en-
tire course of action for the phrase;
4) Movement patterning, like life, is
a uniquely personal journey, an
adventure.
In the early 1970s, Irmgard, Kedzie
Penfield, Ellen Levine, and 1 met
regularly on Saturday mornings to
attempt to put some of the material
into written form It became clear
that irmgard needed a full-time col-
laborator, who was a writer, to work
with her on her life's book She even-
tually found Doris Lewis and they co-
wrote the manuscript, "The Art of
Body Movement as a Key to Percep
ion," which contained a great deal
about the Fundamentals work. I was
invited to read and comment on the
manuscript, which I did, and I have
utilized numerous quotations from it
in my own book.
Unfortunately, most of the state-
ments about Fundamentals were de-
leted from the final published book,
Body Movement: Coping with the Envi-
ronment. This was extremely unfortu-
nate because in the original manu-
script Irmgard discussed how her
work was based on a thorough under-
standing of the early patterns of neu-
rological development, including the
early reflexes, righting reactions, and
oh an at the cong hond
equilibrium responses, as well as the
importance of breath, core-distal con-
nections, and patterns in spinal, ho-
mologous, homolateral, and contra-
lateral movement. With Irmgard,
students of Fundamentals received
bodily training in this work through-
out their training. It was, however,
not Irmgard's style to delineate the
theoretical background. This work
has been beautifully expanded and
enriched in recent years by Bonnie
Bainbridge Cohen, once a student of
Irmgard's.
Although irmgard was trained as a
physical therapist, was totally conver-
sant with anatomy, and had shelves
overflowing with scientific books, she
rarely spoke anatomically. If pushed,
she would discuss a "kinetic chain* In
muscular terms, but she preferred to
use her knowledge in action or refer
to the concept in an open-ended way.
She used "bony landmarks" as refer-
ence points in her hands-on work
rather than spending time teaching
specific muscle kinesiology. For in-
stance, she might briefly mention "the
fan of the outward rotators of the
thigh" and then proceed immediately
into helping a student locate through
touch the bony landmarks of the
greater trochanter and the ischial
tuberosity (sitz bone). The student
could then experience the excur-
sioning of the greater trochanter com-
ing around and down nearer the sitz.
bone as outward rotation of the thigh
happened at the femoral joint. This
way of teaching was again action-
oriented —two bony landmarks chang-
ing spatial relationship
Her own muscle knowledge al-
lowed her to easily facilitate the expe-
rience, but she preferred to keep peo-
ple moving rather than spending class
time memorizing anatomy or kinesiol-
ogy. She might lightly brush through
muscles and bones as she moved on
to expressivity, making teaching of
the scientific side of the bodywork
more like an oriental sumi painting
than photo-realism.
In addition to her action orientation
and her uncanny ability to motivate,
her continual encouragement to view
the whole of any phenomenon and
not get stuck in the parts was always
inspiring Marcia B. Siegel said it
beautifully in her tribute to Irmgard
after her death in 1981, "Irmgard
thought in global terms, holistic
terms. She thought mind, body, and
action are one, that the individual Is
one with the culture, and function [is
one with expression, space with ener-
gy, art with work with environment
with religion. When you spent a lot
of time around her you could get
pretty confused and have to go sort
things out by yourself, but you could
never again see the universe as a
collection of isolated particles."
This capacity to recognize the larg-
er whole while letting the parts be full
and interconnected, was evident in
her ability to let go when she sensed
that one of her students needed to
move on to another teacher or fulfill
another aspect in life. I am thankful
to Irmgard for her constancy in sup-
port and for her valuing of change.
This has made my own life transitions
easier. She knew that love and nur-
turance come from many sources.
Rather than jealously engulf her stu-
dents, she encouraged all of us to see
the larger whole of what we needed
to do to grow, and to go out and
engage it. This was, perhaps, her
greatest gift



 /// picture ////
*Effort describes the dynamics of movement
and inner attitude toward flow (free/bound),
weight (strong/light), time (sudden/sus-
tained), space (direct/indirect), fecting tones,
and texture of movement.
'Effort-Shape was the name used for Laban
Movement Analysis until the mid-1970s in
the U.S.

by Peggy Hackne

----------------

CREATING CHAOS

by Kent De Spain 

As anyone who has ever tried it can attest, defin-
ing dance or illuminating some aspect of dance can be an
intricate and oblique task. The philosophical, historical,
cultural, and aesthetic considerations (to name a few) can
combine to form a dense mass of ideas, sometimes comple-
mentary, sometimes contradictory. Since this multitude of
considerations makes an attempt at a comprehensive view-
point unwieldy and equivocal, writers in dance have been

forced to restrict themselves to very specific approaches to
their material. But the search for more effective approaches
has had an important by-product. It has become clear that
some of the freshest and most exciting insights can be
achieved when theories and techniques from other fields of
inquiry are borrowed and applied to the requirements of
dance.
Examples of these borrowings can be found throughout
the dance literature of the past 25 years; a few would be
Maxine Sheets-Johnstone's application of the work of Mer-
leau-Ponty to dance movement in The Phenomenology of Dance
(1965); the importance of Monroe Beardsley's aesthetics to
Julie Van Camp's dissertation Philosophical Problems of Dance
Criticism (1981); the role that feminist criticism plays in Judith
Lynne Hanna's Dance, Sex and Gender (1988); and Mary Alice
Brennan's application of studies in human cognition to her
continuing research in defining and understanding choreo-
graphic creativity. This paper will continue that borrowing
practice.
During the past thirty years a new area of research, collo-
quially referred to as "Chaos," has established itself in the
scientific community. Due to the popularity of a recent book,
James Gleick's Chaos: Making a New Science, the study of chaos
has begun to influence thought in a wide variety of fields. In
the arts, chaos seems to be evolving from a conversational
topic to a subject of writing and research. In this paper, by
relating some of the basic concepts of chaos to creativity in
improvisational dance, I hope to engender further discourse
between these two fields.

INTRODUCTION
There is a moment that can occur during improvisation
when we achieve a kind of moving "zen-state" where our
conscious mind, that constant editor and critic, shuts down
momentarily and allows our body and our subconscious mind
to take over. While the name may vary, almost every impro-
viser that I have talked with has experienced this zen-state at
one time or another. Blom and Chaplin, in The Intimate Act of
Choreograply, describe it as "a way of tapping the stream of
the subconscious without intellectual censorship, allowing
spontaneous and simultancous exploring, creating, and per-
forming." And although the nature and existence of a conscious
shutdown could be hotly debated by philosophers, I do not
Intend here to establish or define it. Since I had already
experienced it myself, I prefer to concentrate on the questions
that arise once the zen-state has been achieved, and the main
question on my mind is as follows: once we have released
conscious control, from where does the subconscious mind
come up with new movements and coherent images? Or, in
other words, if we think of the collapse of conscious control
as creating a kind of void, what do we draw on to fill that
void?
Every person, of course, has creative channels unique to
his/her own subconscious, thereby bringing individual genet-
le and environmental determinants to bear on every move-
ment decision. An example of a genetic determinant might
be an individual's ration of fast-twitch to slow-twitch muscle
fibers, dictating a propensity toward certain movement quali-
ties. An example of the influence of personal history (envi-
ronment) might be that the muscle-memory of movements
previously experienced in classes and performances could be
reproduced in new combinations during improvisation.
While this probably does occur at times, it would seem to
explain only the most obvious aspects of subconscious mo-
tion, and would leave no room for the more challenging task
of creating completely new movement ideas. Another exam-
ple might be the influence that short or long-term emotions
have on effort qualities and imagination. A dancer who has
an argument immediately before improvising could infuse the
physicality of his/her anger into the movement.
While these elements of individuality and personal history
do partially address the issues we have raised here, they do
so toward an understanding of what makes us each move
differently. Although this is a very valuable course of inqui-
ry, l am more interested here in searching for subconscious
movement sources that are universal. To give some direction
to this task, I will once again draw on Blom and Chaplin
who, in the opening pages of The Moment of Movement, pres-
ent an overview of the elements of improvisational process.
One of these elements, "creating" influences the present
"Creating," for Blom and Chaplin, seems to be a flow of
ideas, movements, images, etc., that needs to be channeled,
"tamed," by the creator. They speak of "impulses [that] spew
and spiral at will," and that artists "gain access to broader
realms" of ideas by following their intuition or by "becoming
a channel through which the vast forces of the universe can
speak." They do not, however, speculate about the nature of
those vast forces. If we wish to attain a deeper understand-
ing of the role of "creating" in improvisation, we must at-
tempt to explore this issue. The remainder of this article will
begin that attempt by applying some of the concepts that
underlie "chaos" to improvisational creativity.
CHAOS
Prior to the 1960s, "chaos" was just a word that defined a
total lack of order and form, but since that time, "chaos" has
begun to refer to a field of scientific inquiry into phenomena
in nature that straddle the boundary between order and dis-
order, between form and formlessness. Through the process
of studying these "dynamical systems" (Gleick), scientists
have discovered that many things previously belleved to be
totally random and chaotic actually have very complex, non-
linear structures; that, in fact, there seem to be overriding
principles in nature that determine the "form" of complexity.
The scientists of chaos studied turbulence in liquids, patterns
in weather, the "fractal" structure of snowflakes, yearly fluc-
tuations of animal populations, and a myriad of other phe-
nomena, and one after another they proved that chaos could
be understood if the observer could only expand his/her
concept of that order.
There are several concepts within the study of chaos that
could have an influence on improvisational creativity. The
first of these is non-linearity. Most systems are linear. They
are structured so that you can understand or predict the
whole by understanding the parts—they "add up." Non-
linear systems do not add up. The actions of one part cause
changes in the others which cause changes in the one, and so
on to complexity and chaos. Gleick states that "analyzing the
behavior of a non-linear equation-is like walking through a
maze whose walls rearrange themselves with each step you
take."
Systems of communication are usually linear. If everyone
understands the parts (words, gestures, symbols) and the
rules by which they combine to form more complex concepts
then communicators can be reasonably assured that their
messages will be correctly received and interpreted. Dance,
as a whole, has certain elements in common with the linear
structures of language, and much can be learned by applying
linguistic analysis to dance. Dance improvisation, though,
seems by its Immediate and unplanned nature to be less
linear than other forms of dance. In fact, Blom and Chaplin
state that "trying to pinpoint in words exactly what dance
improv is seems at times to betray the medium itself, for
language is linear and improv is not." The study of chaos,
because it is based on understanding non-linear systems,
should be able to shed a new kind of light on understanding
dance and dance improvisation.
Scientists investigating non-linearity discovered that even a
system with only three determinants could create patterns of
infinite complexity. They found that "the disorderly behavior
of simple systems acted as a creative process. It generated
complexity….but always with the fascination of living things"
(Gleick). They also discovered that minute changes to the
Input of these systems could create enormous changes in the
output. This was the theory of the "butterfly effect" in
weather where the flapping of a butterfly's wings could set
off a chain of events that would result in a hurricane on
another continent. The technical name for this effect is "sensi-
tive dependence on initial conditions" (Gleick).
Even a cursory look at the factors that influence the cre-
ative act of improvisation would show that it is an infinitely
complex phenomenon. Mood, training, past improvisational
experiences, sensory input (sound, light, temperature, etc.),
physical fitness, and present bodily shape and position in
space are just a few of the determinants that could be exam-
ined. The butterfly effect demonstrates that even small varia-
tions in one of these factors could radically aiter the eventual
movement created. Beethoven or silence, angry dancers or
happy dancers, the beginning or the end of a performance-if
any of these conditions changed, completely different move-
ment would be produced. And since the determinants are
constantly changing, every time an improviser opens the door
to the creative forces, the movement that results must be
unique to the moment.
FRACTALS
The infinite complexity of dance improvisation does not
only occur through changes from moment to moment. Com-
plexity also exists on different levels at the same time. Bun-
dies of muscle fibers combine to make muscles which fire to
move body parts which move and shape to form a body that
moves and shapes in both a physically and culturally-deter-
mined space. In the 1970s, Benoit Mandelbrot and other
chaos scientists began to investigate this kind of complexity to
uncover any underlying rules which might govern it. Their
resulting discoveries about the phenomenon of "fractals" is
now revolutionizing our understanding of nature and natural
objects, particularly the human body.
The concept of fractals developed from the recognition that
our perception of the complexity of natural objects is relative
to the scale at which we view them. If you were to look at a
snowflake with a magnifying glass, you would see that its ice
crystals form a geometric pattern. With a microscope you
could see that this initial geometic pattern is formed by small-
er geometric patterns, and so on down to atomic scale. If you
also understood the mathematics of fractional dimensions,
you could prove that the degree of complexity in the snow-
flake's structure repeats itself across scales (ie., the geometric
patterns are equally complex at 10 or 10,000 times normal
size). That is a fractal.
Fractals can be found throughout nature. Leaves, bran-
ches, coastlines, and the surfaces of metals and rocks are all
fractal structures. More importantly, the human body is full
of fractals: lungs, blood vessels, digestive tissues, liver tissues,
and aspects of the neural system. Mandelbrot realized that he
had discovered one of the organizing principles of nature. I
cannot help but believe that the prevalence of fractals and
chaotic systems, both within our bodies and surrounding us
in the world, must have a profound effect on the nature of
what we create and what we appreciate; and that the very
concept of the "organic" in movement and form is rooted in
these phenomena. I am not alone in this belief. In Gleick's
book, Chaos, the German physicist, Gert Ellenberger, said the
Wiry is it that the silhouette of a storm-bent leafless tree
against an evening sky in winter is perceived as beauti-
ful, but the corresponding silhouette of any multi-purpose
university building is not...? The answer seems to [be
objects-in clouds, trees, mountain ranges, or snow crys-
tals. The shapes of all these are dynamical processes
jelled into pitysical forms..."
Instead of the static physical forms of trees, a dancer uses
the underlying order and disorder of his/her own natural
system (the body) to create movement that is constantly
changing. And yet this movement is still dependent on the
determining factors of genetics and personal history. I can
think of no better description for the unique properties of
dance improvisation than the title of Edward Lorenz's semi-
nal article on chaotic systems, "Deterministic Nonperiodic
Flow.* And Gleick states that flow is "shape plus change,
motion plus form..." These scientists understood the impor-
tance of movement and flow to chaos, and that understanding
is demonstrated by one last concept with an uncanny relation
to the essence of dance improvisation: a strange attractor in
phase space.
STRANGE ATTRACTORS
The investigators of dynamical systems felt that they
needed a way to see chaos; that by seeing it they could better
understand it. To accomplish this task, they adopted an idea,
Phase space is an imaginary multi-dimensional place where
all the properties of a system at a given moment in time can
be condensed and represented by a single point. Any proper-
ty that can be quantified (e.g, velocity) is plotted on a multi-
dimensional axis. Then, as the properties change over time,
the single point that shows them will move to new locations
in phase space. Eventually these movements will draw a
picture charting the history of a system. When you plot a
linear system in phase space, you wind up with a very orga-
nized picture. But when these scientists used their computers
to map out a dynamical, non-linear system, instead of the
random mess of lines you would expect, they were confront-
ed by something astounding-a strange attractor.
A strange attractor is a phase space diagram that never
repeats itself, yet never extends beyond the specific limita-
tions of a system. It consists of a continuous line that swirls
and spins in a captive orbit around one or more centers of
attraction. It is a picture of organized randomness, structured
chaos, and it is beautiful. The first strange attractor, the
Lorenz Attractor, resembled an intricate owl's mask spiraling
in on itself. Subsequent attractors were each unique to the
boundaries and determining factors of the systems they plot-
ted. The mathematical physicist David Ruelle sald: *I have
not spoken of the aesthetic appeal of strange attractors. These
systems of curves, these clouds of points suggest...a
realm...of forms to explore, and harmonies to discover"
DANCING CHAOS
So how does this relate to dance?
I would like to propose the rather radical idea that impro-
visational dance is a kind of strange attractor. That like its
scientific counterpart, improvisation offers the viewer a repre-
sentation of chaos, the structured chaos of human beings in
this case, and that through such a representation one can
perceive and understand much more about the nature of the
human system. My reasoning is as follows:
We have already established that improvisational dance is
non-linear. The complex and unstable nature of the many
factors that determine improvised movement dictate the
unpredictability of the improvisational product. Although
this guarantees that no two movements are exactly the same
and that the number of possible movements is infinite, it does
not mean that any movement is possible. This is because
improvisational dance is deterministic as well as non-linear.
Genetics, personal history, and the physical limitations of the
human body (and the particular bodies of the dancers) are
determining factors that establish a finite boundary for the
infinite movement possibilities. There is no possibility of
movements beyond this boundary. At no time will the danc-
er fly, or transform into a fish, or move at the speed of light.
An image of such occurrences might be conveyed to a viewer,
but only from movements within the range of the human
If improvisation is, as 1 am supposing, to represent a com-
plex creative human being the way that a strange attractor
represents a dynamical system, the characteristics that define
a particular performer's creativity must be trackable through
distinct "channels" of perceivable information. Some such
channels are obvious. A dancer moves through real space in
three dimensions at all times. This is easy to track But there
is so much more that is communicated through movement
that can be analyzed through a variety of channels. For
example, changes in effort quality or shape can be charted
using Laban Movement Analysis. Likewise, the physical
manifestations of human non-verbal communication (e.g, eye-
gaze, gesture, facial expression) constantly provide unique
and documentable information.
But a strange attractor is more than a compilation of chan-
nels. It is supposed to be a kind of shorthand diagram of a
system that is displayed in such a way as to allow us to focus
our attention without distractions. Phase space is a conceptu-
al tool that was created by scientists for this very purpose.
Gleick states that "motion on (an] attractor is abstract, but it
conveys the flavor of the real system." It could then be
viewed as simplistic or reductive, and therefore unrealistic,
but such an approach may be the only way to allow someone
to comprehend the inscrutable. History has provided us with
a similar tool for understanding dance.
In improvisation, the channels that represent the dance
system are not plotted in phase space (although an attempt to
quantify and plot a limited cross-section of dance channels in
phase space might produce fascinating results). Instead,
improvisational dance occurs in a similar conceptual tool but
with socio-cultural origins: the dance-space. While much
more could be said of the dance-space than time here allows,
suffice it to say that the dance-space is more than a three-
dimensional receptacle for movement. It has been historically
developed as the ideal place to view and perform dances with
physical, social, aesthetic, and dramatic implications. Such
implications are visible because, by cultural convention, the
frame of the dance-space allows the viewer to focus attention
onto only the specific aspects of the performer's humanity
that are presented for view (how the performer feels about

his/her body or what he/she believes about politics is only
important insofar as it is perceivable in the course of the
performance). Therefore, the dance-space might be viewed as
simplistic or reductive, and again unrealistic, but it is cultural-
ly accepted for its ability to allow us to understand aspects of
the complexity that is humanity.
SO WHAT?
So improvisational dance is a kind of strange attractor. It
is non-linear, deterministic, and it plots the history of specific
aspects of a complex system in a conceptual space designed
for that purpose. But how this realization should affect our
thinking about improvisation is not yet clear. Although this
question can only be answered over time. I think we can
again take some direction from the chaos scientists. At a time
when the field of science was stumbling headlong down a
hundred different paths towards greater and greater detail
and differentiation, the chaos scientists emerged from many
different disciplines. They took a step back (or was it up, or
maybe out?) so that a meteorologist could excite some mathe-
maticians who could talk to some physicists would had some-
thing to contribute to physiologists. Chaos became more than
just another tool of a branch of science. It provided the first
holistic understanding of how all the pieces fit together.
Not long ago I sat down to dinner with a poet and a pian-
ist and a number of other friends. We talked about chaos.
Fractals in poetry. Musical improvisation as deterministic,
non-periodic flow. Eyes were opening, heads were nodding.
and there were many exclamations of "Yes...I" For the first
time in a long while I felt like we were all on common
ground. That for just an evening, what was the same about
our arts and our creativity within them was more important
than all of the differences. Our talk simply 
provided us an opportunity, for an evening, to catch a
glimpse beyond the veil of creative process and feel a sense of
wonder.

p.s.

The Lorenz Attractor. This is the very first strango attractor,
discovered by Edward Lorenz. Imagine the foolings Lorenz
experienced when this image emerged from a system that was
thought to ba chaotic. Note how the swirlings never repeat but
also never escape the boundaries of the system


----------------

FOR JOHN CAGE ON HIS 75th BIRTHDAY

Dear John Cage
It is already dusk
and the cows are not yet in—
already dawn, are not yet out. Listen.
It sounds ever thus, the breathing.
40 years ago
you touched down at our landing,
young planets,
inwardly orbiting. tirra lira loo
Our first words were a courtship!
tirra lira day in and day out
Shall I tell you the secret of our mystery?
We make love for justice
and delight: kindliness, laughter, and rage.
Macrobiotic eros, you nourish the ends of the earth
in ever new beginnings.
The cows, John, the cows are banging their udders like soft cymbals,
and the milkers are playing the teats like bell ropes
tugging and letting go. The music, my God, the music!

by M. C. Richards


----------------

FOR BURT THE TEMPLE DANCER

You were dancing in the temple
when you fell
between the money changers and the mills of the gods
grinding down the tracks.
You had just planted a tree on the altar
and a line of evergreens down the nave.
The knees of your costume were brown and wet
with the soil you had been kneeling in.
On your knees, on your knees, digging
the womb for the new root, the bulb,
crazy with deep semen laughter in a continuing
fertility gavotte.
I lost you for a moment, you vanished so fast,
I was dizzy and nauseous in the spinning
walkway, the acceleration of time, it was too soon too soon
for you to die. Die was not a word that fit you
in any way.
Now I know where you are:
you are where the colors are
before they come onto my canvas
you are where the sounds rise in a realm
before the throat—the words
before we speak them—the lengthening of your arm
before it moves into its new stretch.
You are there where we are when we are artists and
the Muse has taken us, when we can feel
there is something from the other side coming through.
I found you suddenly, suddenly you and I
were in the same timeless spaceless dance. I
was painting. I had turned to the colors
in my grief. I moved the brush.
Yellow, magenta, olive, sienna, gold, rose,
I felt myself change.
The ecstasy spread up my wrists.
The edges of my body softened.
There you appeared, intent and buoyant.
We entered the sanctum together
and knew where we were, where we are.

by M. C. Richard



----------------

CONFESSIONS OF A CRABBY CRITIC

by Burt Supree

This article is reprinted, with permission,
from Dance Ink, Volume One, Number
One, May/lune 1990, 145 Central Park
West, NY, NY 10003. It will also be
included in the forthcoming Dance Ink
Anthology.
It's not cricket for dance
critics to complain. We don't have a
harder time than dancers or choreo-
graphers, even if the money we gen-
erally earn is in the same pitiful
range. True, we all see much more
mediocre or incompetent work than
we'd like, but then there has to be a
great quantity of such work at all
levels if there is also to be choreogra-
phy worth admiring. Nothing Is
harder to create than a really good
dance. Despite our whining and
groaning, and in the midst of the put-
downs we may trade in the lobby, we
still know that.
Dance critics aren't detached ob-
servers inured to disappointment;
we're passionate, prejudiced advo-
cates with great expectations. When
you see too much unrelievedly bad or
dull work and write too many consis-
tently unkind but serious reviews, it's
difficult not to feel like a bad person.
On the other hand, a piece of savage-
ly humorous writing-something
punishing—lifts the spirits. You feel
that you've dispensed justice, that
rare commodity. And readers love it.
A critic's strength fluctuates like
anyone else's. You try to keep up
with everything to be fully responsi-
ble, but this is impossible. Years ago,
I was seeing too many concerts each
week, I was frazzled by trying to take
in too much and having my personal
life atrophy, and felt guilty at my
failure to meet my obligations to the 
field. Then Tobi Tobias remarked
that, of course, it was impossible to
keep up. What a relief! But periodi-
cally, the pace accelerates and you try
obsessively to cram everything in.
Of course, some critics thrive on
going to performances nearly every
night; they can see a half-dozen con-
certs in one weekend. Not me. Dance
is not my whole life. Usually, If 1 go
to more than two or three perfor-
mances a week, even if I go to some
just for the pleasure of it, I begin to
think I hate dance. Weekends, I get
out of town unless the weather makes
it too horrendous to drive, or gloomy
skies and minus-forty-degree wind-
chills make being in the country un-
appealing. This double life keeps me
relatively sane, or so I imagine. If I
stick around I wind up going to a
couple of performances. This is work,
and makes every day of the week
identical.
When you're young it's accept-
able, and hopefully temporary, to
work a couple of jobs, rehearse and
perform, stay up late winding down.
At forty-nine, I'm not willing to spend
all day at the office, spend nights out,
eat dinner at eleven, steal hours here
and there to write about what I've
seen. I want to spend some time at
home doing nothing playing opera or
zydeco on the hi-fi, reading a spy
book, and keeping an eye on some
dumb program on the TV with the
sound off. I want to go out to dinner
with pals and not have to jump up
and run off to a performance just
when we're getting mellow. I want to
have a good time, and I expect dance
to help satisfy that desire. Once I
despised the middle-aged people who
complained about sitting on the floor,
even on cushions. Now I'm one of 
them. I need a comfortable seat for
my tush, decent back support, and a
reasonably unobstructed view if I'm
going to give a performance the atten-
tion it may merit. But I want an es-
cape hatch, too. If I hate a program, 1
want to be able to slip out without
parading in front of the audience and
the performers. I'm not willing to be
tortured, however unintentionally.
Work that is raw and unfinished
often appeals to me. But a surprising
number of concerts to which critics
are invited are far from ready for
professional criticism or review. Cer-
tainly, choreographers need to show
their work to a public, to people other
than their friends and supporters; of-
ten that's the only way to learn what
works and what doesn't. But when a
critic is seduced by hype to attend a
performance of truly naive or inept
work, he or she isn't likely to return
to see another piece by that choreo-
grapher for a long time.
While it is essential for a choreo-
grapher to have been a dancer, chor-
eographing is a very different kind of
skill and not every dancer has a feel-
ing for it nor does every person who
choreographs a few dances have the
talent and Imagination and stamina to
continue. At the same time, there's a
sense in the modern/postmodern
dance world that one naturally steps
up from being a dancer to being a
choreographer. And the venture-
someness and confidence of dancers
who stretch into composition is one of
the elements that makes American
modern dance lively and inventive.
A lack of that strength and mental
vigor is one of the reasons why ballet
has become so nearly moribund.
But it is maddening to observe
choreographers who don't seem to
have any reason to choreograph ex-
cept that they have acquired a mea-
sure of the skill in making steps and
moving people around. They think
they ought to be making dances, so
they do despite having nothing to
say. Some seem incapable of learning
from their own work For these chor-
eographers, above all, my patience
has snapped.
I wasn't always this intolerant.
My inclination is to be supportive.
But when my lover became sick with
AIDS, requiring nearly constant atten-
tion because of his physical weakness
and emotional distress, time away
from him became precious. I had to
steal time from him to go to the of-
fice. I went to one performance a
week and wrote about it, whatever it
was. Those few hours represented
the only time I spent absorbed in
something of my own. The private
activity kept me sane.
Works that seemed pointless or
witless or lazy Infuriated me. I didn't
expect everything to be good-that
would have been idiotic. But l did
expect, and demand, that a choreogra-
pher not just be jerking him- or her-
self off and jerking me around. 1
expected that he or she had a specific
intention and a hard idea of what he
or she was doing, an idea that was
reasonably close to reality, and subject
matter that was worth the trouble.
Having my time wasted was not
something I could shrug off. Every
performance was balanced against my
lover's pain and need. Now, more
and more this seems to me a legiti-
mate attitude. Dance Isn't competing
only with other leisure time activities;
It must stand up to competition with
the very best and worst of life.
Dancers and choreographers ex-
pect from us what we expect from
them: vision and clarity. Many want
their work discussed in terms of the
history of the art and the output 
the choreographer as well as in a
contemporary cultural context. Few
writers have the space to do this in
more than a cursory way. Writers
and editors have to fight for space.
Newspapers and magazines truthfully
reflect American culture in their indif-
ference to the arts, except for media
stars and those arts capable of bring-
ing in commercial revenues.
Part of the desire of dancers and
choreographers, I think, is to elevate
the status of dance in artistic dis-
course. This is probably a good idea
for lots of reasons-money being only
one. But as it happens, It's a job I'd
rather leave to others who are better
at nailing down influences, drawing
parallels with other fields, and noting
trends. I don't believe that abstrac-
tions and generalities are more mean-
ingful than specific details. I dont 
care deeply about trends. I don't
necessarily care who thought of some-
thing first and stamped their name on
it. I'm not very interested in the
windbag rhetoric that so brilliantly
juustifies tedious work by deflecting
attention from what actually happens
onstage. You don't have to be anti-
intellectual to glaze over when you
hear words like "semiotics" and "de-
construction."
I'm most interested in the imme-
diate event of a particular evening:
what I saw, how that struck me, how
and why it worked or didn't. I don't
want to pull away from an event, to
experience it remotely. If I can be
touched, I want to be. I care about
the instance I observe, not about what
I'm supposed to have seen. I don't
try to neutralize the specific baggage
1, like any audience member, bring to
a performance. Whatever objectivity !
have comes from being involved in
dance since the early sixties, and from
looking at a hell of a lot of it.
Unfortunately, a critic is very
much of his or her time. We usually
have the closest affinity for the kinds
of work we were drawn to early on,
work that embodied our own ques-
tions and that we had to wrestle with
in forming our own ideas and stan-
dards. It can be uncomfortable to
yield to an alien sensibility, particular-
ly the kind that yanks our certainties
out from under us. It can be hard not
to automatically subject new work to
the strictures of the old; it is some-
times unclear whether familiar stan-
dards are appropriate. I'm not think-
ing of a set of mental rules. But we
may find ourselves unable to experi-
ence a work directly. We hold it at
bay and it filters into us piecemeal
through our objections. Is that be-
cause the work is lousy or because it
is foreign to our taste?
What is taste, anyway? And how
can we learn to go beyond our partic-
ular preferences? Is it worthwhile
struggling to be more inclusive and
more catholic? I think it is essential
to admit that all is not known, that
creation is an ongoing process, and
that we can continue to learn. And if
everything we see is crap? If that's
so, we can make that judgment but
we ought still look in a reasonably
openhearted, open-minded way.
Maybe our opinions aren't always of
primary importance. What's crucial is
to keep our perceptions open and our
evaluations flexible. The choreo-
grapher's task is to give body to an
idea. And when we pick that matter
apart, however delicate the surgery,
we risk denying it its measure of
truth.
We must believe our eyes. We
need to look at dances in the context
of our whole experience. Yet we
must try, too, to see the work as a
thing in itself, on its own terms as
something possibly new, full of tender
potential. W e must see it in relation
to the past, as an expression of the
present moment, as a gesture toward
an unknown future.

---------------------

BREITENBUSH CONFERENCE ON CRITICISM

by Karen Nelson

It seemed like such a huge
task to speak about a subject so per-
sonal: how we feel about each other's
work. We come together to dance for
one week a year, many of us repeated-
ly for the last ten years and some for
the first time. There is a sense of
ongoing community with transmissions
from years past coming into the pres-
ent. Yet in many ways we hardly
know each other. We don't know
much about the performance work
each other makes and the process
involved. To speak about that work
scemed like a big risk. I felt anxiety
at the thought of the goal we had set
before ourselves: to agree by consen-
sus on two programs of performance,
drawing from the work of about twen-
ty-five artists.
My overall and underall impression
or realization during the conference
was that criticism is a perceptual
practice. Really, that's all it is. Each
person has ways of seeing-habitual,
Icarned, experimental. This bias is the
basis of criticism.
Rachel Kaplan writes dance criti-
cism. Her concerns are largely about
the politics of that action.
questions about power, intention, histo-
ry, education. She talks about it in her
performance piece about her teachers,
"Going Far Is Returning." She refers
to the importance of writing about
each other and the net it casts out into
So we wrote about each other. We
took Christina Svane's "Fountain"
score as a method to reflect on each
performance we saw. We would write
for 3 minutes following each work,
then meet after the performances and
have a reading of the writings. I
learned a lot in these sessions, hearing
from all the different eyes, hearts and
souls who had been exposed to the 
same event as I had been. Everyone
had their unique experience, yet simi-
larities were telling. On the other side
of the coin, after I performed, I experi-
enced the period of time when the
audience was writing as a sensation of
energy continuing to move. Creativity
was breeding more creativity and it
didn't get stuck on a particular person
In our discussions about criticism,
the issue of "criteria" came up. We
wanted to identify the different lenses
we watch a work through. So we
spent time trying to notice our natural
or habitual choices of viewing and also
tried on some less natural ways in
order to stretch our tendencies. We
watched improvised "pick-up" pieces
with a time-and-personnel structure
solo for one minute, duet for 2 min-
utes, etc. Then we'd go around the
circle listing one "criterium" of what
we were looking at or for. Here is a
very small portion of that list (from
notes by Rachel Kaplan): Interest,
sound, senses, circles, heaven, brave,
stimulation, outrage, gender, bones,
attitude, rhythm, narrative, perspective,
body parts, character, seeing, inten-
tion, balance, connection, distance,
drama, transitions, readiness, subtext,
body tone, focus, response, gaze, ar-
chitecture, time, space, image, scale,
continuum, dynamics, energy, move-
ment states, emotion, relation, history,
politics, presencelattention, perform-
erlaudience relationship. I think we
were all surprised at the infinite num-
ber of ways to see and experience.
At a later session we viewed for-
mal performances with specific criteria
to inform our writing.
One group would watch for narrative in the work,
another for composition/craft and
another for their subjective person
responses. We also included a wild-
card group in which people could
make up their own criteria on the spot.
It was a good stretch of perceptual
muscles to view work in ways I don't
naturally want to. It showed me how
I choose to see the way I do and why
I like to see that way. In recognizing
my own preferences, I give room to
others for their's. This creates the
conditions for dynamic dialogue.
For a visually impaired person,
dance criticism is frankly a drag.
Megan Hughes, who is visually im-
paired and drawn to the dance form of
contact improvisation because of its
accessibility, felt "disabled" by the
topic of dance criticism, which at that
point seemed to be based on visual
perception. Another disabling aspect of the
conference, for Emery Blackwell, a
man with cerebral palsy, was its de-
pendence on verbal or written commu-
nication. Because he doesn't write
with a pen, Emery couldn't participate
in the three-minute writings, and be-
cause his speech takes some time to
utter and to understand, in big group
discussions he'd often choose to not
speak especially where the time was
preciously short.
The next day, in an attempt to
understand these issucs, a small group
of us got together. We practiced
"viewing" work with our eyes closed,
while others, with cycs open, verbally
interpreted what they saw while speak-
ing with rocks in their mouths. And
still others, blindfolded, verbally trans-
lated the rock-mouthed speaking.
Afterwards, the blindfolded "viewers"
moved as a means of feeding back to
the performers and translators what we
"felt" had happened. Our small
group's performance report was a
mixture of re-oriented communication,
chaotic charm and art.
Later in the conference during a
round robin, we had agreed to speak
about what we were perceiving/seeingas 
we danced and as we watched.
Partnerships changed frequently as
well as the configurations-solos,
duets, trios, quartets-according to the
desires of the individuals involved. At
first the "criteria" was open to any-
thing but after awhile it was agreed we
would hone in on one subject. In the
course of improvising, perceiving, and
speaking, the group landed on the
criteria of "satisfaction or not." The
following was noted by K.J. Holmes:
SATISFYING-endings,
space, delicacy of fingers, focus, past
image, obstructed view, group unified,
different levels, synchronistic, the light,
staying with
rhythm, acceptance of support, stimu-
lation in non-sarisfaction.
NOT SATISFYING-space gets
too busy too fast, confusion and wait.
ing, not finishing an image, predici-
ability of change, bumpy weight ex-
change, more satisfying to do than to
watch, not being able to see what was
going on, holding on to an image after
it is not working.
Again the variety of perceptions
and opinions brings home the ques-
tion— since we all make up our own
movie, why worry if you like some-
thing (or make something) someone
else hates? It's our diversity of expe-
rience that we have to compare and
contrast. We are different and that
gives us a need and a possibility to
learn.
Well, the organization of the per-
formances came off without one hitch.
In past years a few of us would make
a ton of decisions regarding other
people's work, like how to fit it into
the program, etc. The concerts were
always too long. This year the group
made the decisions. We agreed to
make shorter programs and we had
unanimous agreement in the ordering.
Places where we needed to tweak
some work, for example, by cutting
time or overlapping with another piece,
etc., were all worked out by the artists
themselves. People in general seemed
quite willing to speak about their im-
pressions of the pieces and how they
fit or didn't fit together. I think we
discovered that our practice of criti-
cism enabled efficient and satisfying
organization of a public performance.
The dialogue of perceptions had a
formal container at the Conference on
Criticism. Thanks, everyone, for the
art. Some subjects tossed around for
next year's conference include: pres-
ence, inspiration, composition, and
teaching.

THESE PAINTINGS are by Megan Hughes, a British
artist, who is visually impaired and a newcomer to
She was invited to the Breiten-
bush Jam and Conference by Britain's Touchdown
Danco. Theso paintings were a kind of premonition of
what I would bo doing many yoars later in Contact,"
Megan says, 'My work in Contact danco now influences
my paintings even more..."



---------------


Quality... 

by Chris Aiken

that word keeps
percolating through my conscious-
ness since last year's Breitenbush
Jam/ Conference. How do we define
work that is of qualiry? Presence,
focus, honesty, facility, radiance,
clarity of intention, organic, being in
the thing and not thinking too much
...the ability to move people??? Is
qualiry only in the eye of the behold-
er? Or is it something which is
ourside of us and that we simply
acknowledge when we experience it.
I find it curious how my tastes
change as / grow older.
I thought were of incredibly high
quality five or ten years ago, might
not interest me now. Does it still
have qualiry? Well sure. This goes
for my own work as well as that of
others. Five years ago i might have
done something and thought, wow.
that was really great! And now, 1
might look at the limitations or the
things that didn't work.
Is quality something that is rela-
tive-to the artist's level of experi-
ence, the audience, the environment?
I think the quality of a beginner's
work is different than the qualiry of
someone who is more experienced
yet quality can exist in both cases.
This makes me wonder if this thing
we call quality, particularly in re-
spect to performance, is a moment-
to-moment experience, involving tran-
sient elements. From this perspec-
tive, qualiry is no longer a thing or a
standard, but a process. Hmmm...
I'm curious how it is that I can
hear a singer singing in a language
that I don't understand and know
that the person is singing from their
heart; that they have "soul." It is
not simply a matter of technique,
because I've heard many accom-
plished musicians who fail to inspire
this kind of experience in me. I
sometimes wonder how my skill as a
listener or audience member comes
into play. I often have a tendency to
look at dance primarily from the
perspective of movement-does it
make sense, is it real or affected,
where's the movement coming from?
etc. There are other ways to view
dance, surely, that are just as valid.
From my point of view, the most
inspiring art, the kind of art I want
to create, is art that can be appreci-
ated by people who know little or
nothing about the discipline involved
in my particular medium. It means a
lot to me when one of my peers
speaks to me after a performance.
appreciating the work that I've put in
and my success or lack of success in
expressing what I'm trying to say—
need that. But when someone who
knows linle about dance andior im-
provisation comes up after a perfor-
mance and expresses how they con-
nected to what I was doing. feeling,
or sensing-that's great! When I am
able to engage their interest, particu-
larly their heart, it is very satisfying.
It makes me feel that I'm not just
preaching to the converted. Is it
possible to be committed to one's
work, to be engaged fully on a heart
level and not make work of quality?
I doubt it.
What I find difficult to deal with
is that critics often write off improvi-
sation as a performance form prob-
ably because they've seen bad impro-
visation. I will be the first to admit
that bad improv can be pretty awful.
But so can bad choreography. What
are the odds that when you go to see
a performance of set work that it will
be good? Are these any better than
the odds of seeing a good improvised
performance? I seriously doubt it.
Fact is I think a lot of the dance /
see is not that interesting and not of
high quality.
So wity do critics feel the need to
put down improv? I often wonder if
it has to do with their inability to
showcase their analytical skills when
they are writing about improvisation.
Improvisation makes the critics' job
more difficult because it requires that
they open themselves up to a lot of
possibilities rather than put things
into identifiable boxes.
 

------------------------


CRITICISM, PERFORMANCE, AND THE RUPTURE
New Ways to Will Change 

by Rachel Kapla


The conference following the
1992 Contact Jam at Breitenbush Hot
Springs focused on the issue of criti-
cism and its relationship to perfor-
mance. In October, 1991, I received
a letter from Karen Nelson from
somewhere in Europe inviting me to
Breitenbush to participate in the jam
and the conference. She had read an
article published in CQ about my
experience as a performer and critic
["Wky / Write Criticism," 16:1,
Winter 91/ and was interested in
what it was I actually thought I was
doing. Somewhat outside the contact
community for the last few years, I
accepted her invitation, not knowing
what to expect except (at the very
least) hot tubs and tall trees. I was
more than willing.
During the jam, in an effort to
engage everyone in the process of
considering criticism, after people
performed, the witnesses would
spend three minutes writing their
thoughts, reflections, and ideas about
the work. This structure came to us
from something Christina Svane calls
The Fountain and is practicing in
Amsterdam [see "The Fountain," CQ
17:2, SummeriFall 92]. Our version
of The Fountain was ostensibly more
"critical" and less "poetic" than
Svane's version, although everyone
was given the opportunity to play as
they wished. After the jam ended,
we had two days to focus more in-
tensively on the issue of criticism
and how it interfaces with the act of
performance. The conference was
rather haphazard and spontancous.
but what was generated that was of
some importance was the beginnings
of a new language with which to
speak to one another about what it
was we were secing.
What follows are some thoughts
on criticism and performance that
came to me after my time in Oregon.
What I'm most interested in
about performance and criticism right
now has to do with bridging and
ultimately closing the gap between
the public and the private world,
between who I am when I am alone
and who I am when 1 am in public.
It is for me an ideal that the perform-
er represent on stage, in public, her
private self, and that the act of per-
forming is the practice of traversing
the realm between the personal and
the public. The most luminescent
moments in performing come when
they are one and I am interested in
how elusive this moment actually is,
and how profound.
I was thinking something about
narrowing this gap between myself
on stage and myself in the world as
being central to my performance
practice, and then I tore the ligaments
in my knee, and the riots exploded in
L.A., and so I was thrown into think-
ing of ruptures, and of gaps, and
about jumping into them, right into
the gap, as a way to close it.
We are living in a time of frag-
mentation, disintegration, reforma-
tion. From the riots in L.A., to the
media hallucinations we call George
Bush and Bill Clinton, to our con-
stantly shifting relationships, and
etcetera, we are in a time of rupture.
The invitable gap between things
creates a place for improvisation, a
place of not knowing. The leaps the
improvisor takes towards the rupture
are important because this space
holds the material we need to get
I am thinking about jumping
into these gaps, instead of denying or
avoiding them, as a way to change
the status quo. I am also trying to
understand how, or if, the act of
criticism-seeing, perceiving, feeding
back-serves this jump into the void.
If the critic can perceive the artist
jumping into this gap and elucidate
not only the jump but the landing—
what the artist finds when she gets
there, then perhaps the acts of perfor-
mance and criticism will bring a light
into the dark places of the rupture.
I base all of my remarks on an
assumption of the innately political
nature of art. An interpretive strate-
gy for all of this is a metaphoric one.
Artist-critic-audience, family systems,
human-natural world relationships,
love relationships-are all metaphors
existing in the field of the rupture.
As usual, I circle around the
image of the circle and wonder how
we can come to one another with the
kind of attention we need to fuel our
work. I think it matters fundamental-
ly that we pay as much attention as
we can to these ruptures-between
the body and the mind, life and art,
the artist and the audience, the critic
and the artist, the work and the larger
world—and jump into the gaps be-
tween them.
It may be that the gap between
performing artists and critics can
only be bridged when the artist and
the critic come to better perceive the
nature of each other's work. I think
it is important for an artist to become
her own critic as an exercise in learn-
ing to see and in developing self-
acceptance. If, as performers, we
cannot acknowledge our own inner
judges and instead project them onto
the eyes of our watchers, our audi-
ences, we will never fully give the
gift of our attention in performance
because our fear of judgement will
overwhelm the truth of the work. I
believe our re-evaluation of these
roles of performer, critic, audience/
witness holds within it the possibility
of relationships of more depth within
the dance community.
If the act of performance is the
practice of being myself in public,
then the act of criticism acknowledg-
es and elucidates this gesture, and
consolidates it in the world through
words.
Using my words, as a critic, I
can serve the function of making
tangible and finite the dance which is
transitory and atemporal. Using my
senses, as a witness, I can serve the
function of grounding the fluid ges-
tures of the dancer in my visceral
and kinesthetic responses. The crit-
ic—an articulate observer of the in-
choate experience that is dance—has
the job of helping the artist draw
closer to the self by tracking her own
internal experience and making it
clear to a viewer. This articulation
can connect and interpose the percep-
tions of both the critic and the artist.
These are acts of illumination, inti-
macy, identification, communion.
The critic can substantiate per-
formance by elucidating its formal,
emotional, and physical qualities and
transmitting them in words. But to
be this kind of critic, I must be will-
ing to suspend my disbelief, play
along with the rules of the performer,
and be ready at all times to see and
feel the connection, luminosity, and
reality that exists between me and the
artist.
What is useful in the critics art?
Criticism can consolidate community
by furthering a circle of attention the
artist initiates. In the act of clarify-
ing what is seen-verbally, emotion-
ally, intuitively, kinesthetically-the
critic has the responsibility of receiv-
ing a communication from the artist
and transmitting it intelligently across
the rupture to the witnesses of the
work.
I want to facilitate the creation
of these relationships between us as
the essential underpinnings of our
lives—what makes it possible for us
to continue and to flourish. I believe
that through the act of conscious see-
ing, conscious feedback, and con-
scious acknowledgement of the work
I see, I become more connected to
what surrounds me.
Am I saying anything that hasn'!
been said before? I'm not sure. All
I know is, it's about relationship.
It's about care. And we still haven't
got it yet. It's too simple

-----------------------------------

INTERVIEW WITH PAULINE DE GROOT

by Ronnie Britto


Amsterdam 17 April 1992

Echos resounding throughou
the modern dance world a t the begin-
ning of this century: Dance that is
experimentation. Trial and error.
An unfolding of possibility. Today,
the once revolutionary forms of Dun-
can, St. Denis, Shawn, and Martha
Graham have become "classics'
within the spectrum of modern dance.
as the form and pressure of contem-
porary times have given birth to
another equally exciting generation
of pioneers; one of whom is Pauline
de Groot, who has set the tone for
most of the creative new dance work
that has emerged in the Netherlands
in the past twenty-five years.
After study in the U.S.A. (1957-
1965) with Martha Graham, Merce
Cunningham, and Erick Hawkins,
and performing with the companies
of José Limon and Erick Hawkins,
Pauline returned to the Netherlands
and introduced new ideas about
dance, the body, and aesthetics. It
was her studio that formed the basis
of the School for New Dance Devel-
opment at the Theaterschool, Amster-
dam.
Exploring the resources and di-
mensions of energy in movement, she
integrated into her work principles of
movement disciplines such as T'ai
Chi, Release Technique, Todd Align-
ment, and Contact Improvisation.
Her nonconformity and her work
with unusual dance skills has over
the years led to various approaches
to performance, from open improvi-
sation to set choreography and theat-
rical events, from using speech and
live music to silence.
Pauline de Groot performs and
choreographs in an international
circuit of new dance and is a guest-
artist at academies and dance institu-
tions around the world. [R.B.]

Pauline de Groot: What is tech-
nique? I ask myself. I consider
technique to be an investigation into
the possibilities of movement within
one's body. Research on a deeply
personal, physical, practical level.
Ronnle Britton: How would you go
about this research?
Pauline: Practically, it's very sim-
ple. I usually start lying on the floor.
Sensing, breathing, until I can sense
my "here and now" as I let go of al
that is superimposed. Often some-
thing as simple as lying on the floor
is difficult. I see technique as build-
ing-blocks, the basis out of which
dance can grow. It is also the neces-
sary strengthening of a dancer's alert
body. It is investigation and practice,
hand in hand. Directly. Physically.
The tuning of the mind with the body
as opposed to a mindless, militaristic
shaping of the body.
Ronnie: What kind of mindless.
militaristic shaping?
Pauline: It depends on the teacher.
But some teachers approach the body
by simply placing it in a particular
position. It doesn't have to be any
one specific technique, but if you ask
me about Graham, I think that within
the Graham technique there is the
danger of handling the body in a
militaristic way, although not all the
Graham instructors would do this.
Still, it happens. Technique for me
is a tuning to gravity and levity from
outside, emotion and sensation inside.
Ronnie: One of the things you
talked about before was weight and
rhythm in the body making form. I
would be very interested to know
how that concept developed and how
you have worked with it in order to
develop your particular movement
language.
Pauline: Because I believe that
when you initiate movement in one
part of the body it will create a chain
reaction of movement in another. I
could start with an experiment-say
in the joints-which will lead to
movement in other parts of the body.
When the body is tuned and open to
different reactions, it's not in a ma-
nipulated state, and these impulses
can free many other different quali-
ties of movement.
Ronnie: You once spoke about your
exercises with Tai Chi, breathing,
yoga, and the Open Theatre. You
also spoke about freeing the mind
and working with unknown verbal
andior physical expression-dis-
covering other forms. Is this all
something which helped you to come
to this idea of weight and rhythm?
Pauline: You know, the ideas are
formulations of something which is
already happening. The idea may
sound very intricate and thought out
but really it's merely an attempt to
put into words what we are actually
doing at any moment. Yoga was
very good, as was the work with the
Open Theatre. From the Open Thea-
tre, for example, we used exercises
involving lying on the floor but in no
particular shape and not even trying
to sense the structure of the body, but
imagining you are an animal waking
up in the woods. So your movement
is guided by another idea, another
environment. Changing your imag-
ined environment will quite naturally
change the movement and can lead to
very interesting impulses.
The importance of sensation.
Sensing the forces that are present,
the flow and breathing. Imagery to
make one aware of the anatomy, to
see the structure of the body from the
inside...initiating movement from
different parts of the body. Imnges
of opening and closing in the joints,
lengthening, widening. Letting go of
trying to hold the body, which is
often our defense against pain, in
order to allow for efficient alignment
and use of energy. Letting scientific
knowledge of the anatomy inform the
mechanics of movement through the
creative process. Technique is a kind
of training of the mind and body
together; a correction of bad habits.
Ronnie: What bad habits?
Pauline: Holding. Tightening up.
Bad habits that can lead to injury.
Having too much tension in a partic-
ular part of the body or not aligning
oneself properly. Alignment can be
quite a job because we all have accu-
mulated so many bad habits. Tech-
nique for me is also the discipline of
practice. A daily listening and doing.
Understanding the basis of practice.
Listening to the body's inner flow.
You can say it's very physical but
once you begin to listen to the physi-
cal flow, you also begin to hear.
You're talking to yourself and every-
thing begins to mesh. The sensation
of correct alignment and an opening
up to the sensation of "now', which
is not only what is happening at that
moment within the body, but also
within the whole being and environ-
ment-the immediate experience.
With technique as such, in which the
dropping of old habits is possible, it
is equally possible to leam phrases of
different styles.
Ronnie: With that last statement, it
sounds as if technique for you is
almost a generic term.
Pauline: That's the way I sce it
although it can never be taught in a
generic way because even if it's
based on the most generic principles,
everyone gives it their own form. I
wouldn't find anything wrong with
the forms, so long as the generic
qualities are present.
Ronnie: After ballet, Graham,
Hawkins, and Cunningham, you
continued your search for something
that was more your own. You've
spoken to me abour Martha's "psy-
chological dramas," Erick's orna-
mental technique. Cunningham's very
quick, rapid technique. Erick sent
you to Andre Bernard. Let's talk
about letting go of unnecessary ten-
sions and feeling one's own possibili-
ties and your specific work with that
after these four very different periods
in your life.

Pauline: The work with Bernard
was at the basis of my own experi-
mentation. It helped me to discover
what it is to listen to the body, to do
nothing. He teaches kinesiology.
You'd lie on a table and he would
touch parts of the head or the neck,
wherever he happened to be standing
over you. He only touched you. He
would then suggest imagining that
the touch could travel from one side
of the body all the way through to
the other. From there something
would happen because you imagine
that it is happening. And all because
you are doing nothing. As soon as
you started to do something he would
say "No, no, don't do anything, just
imagine." Soon it becomes clear that
these images are constantly changing
the whole feeling in your body, so
that you can allow yourself to let go,
or just experience the body in a way
that it is there instead of as a shape
or form.
Ronnie: You've also said that you
can actively allow movement to occur
instead of trying to force the move-
ment. Was there something else you
were doing during the time you
worked with Bernard that was a way
of experimenting with what you had
learned or did that not start until you
came back to Holland?
Pauline: As you are asking me this
question, I'm trying to remember 
what first gave me such a clear sen-
sation of gravity and i realize that
this feeling was probably always
there, and that I could guide gravity
through my spine into the ground. I
also felt as if I could get energy up
from the ground. There were thus
always two directions this energy
was moving in, upwards and down-
wards. I think the work with Andy
made all this very clear.
Ronnie: After you returned to Hol-
land, what had your own work be.
come? With which forms were you
experimenting? I made a note about
something you said about using one's
own energy in order to shape it into
form.
Pauline: That really has to do with
improvising as we always do when
we are trying to make something—
dancing to anything, salsa for exam-
ple, just to generate some kind of
movement. I knew that I wanted to
create my own work and so I had to
find a way of doing this. I didn't
know my way around and so I decid-
ed that teaching would be a very
good way of beginning.
Ronnle: What were you doing in
your teaching in order to further
your experiments?
Pauline: When I started teaching
here in Holland, I leaned a lot on
exercises I had done with Erick in
the States. I had also been able to
create short pieces of my own while
I was with him, and teach a little, so
I had been able to figure out what I
wanted to teach at my own pace:
simple rhythmical patterns, brushes,
movement on the floor. Pushing into
the floor and coming out of the floor
were both very strong movements for
me. This was mostly what I was do-
ing because I had cut out the arms
for a while. I couldn't deal with them
and decided I just wanted to have the
arms hanging instead of shaped in a
way that had not been to my liking.
Ronnie: When did the arms come
back in?
Pauline: Well of course the arms
were always there. But I wanted the
arms to be energized because of what
the body was doing and not posi-
tioned. I felt they could serve to
"balance" the action of the body.
Ronnie: How have your experiments
furthered since that time?
Pauline: In 1974, I met Mary Ful-
kerson who had been working in
England for a while. I had read her
writings on the axis of the body,
practical knowledge of the anatomy,
and "letting go." I thought that here
in Europe no one besides me had
ever spoken about that before, in
spite of the fact that I had been look-
ing for it. So I thought I had to meet
her, which took quite a while. It
started a whole new exchange. I had
already been teaching in England
every year at the Dartington Dance
Festival. When Mary became lead
of the Dance Department there,
things took on a different shape. She
organized a yearly festival of 'new
dance' and invited people from Eu-
rope and the U.S. who were in the
process of creating new dance work.
I hadn't studied with her of course,
which at the time I would have liked
to do, but there I had the chance to
see what she was doing. She also
had Steve Paxton over to teach, an
old friend from our dancing times
together in the '60s in NY whose
work since then I didn't know. I
realized that I'd missed what they
had been doing through the years I'd
been back in Holland setting up shop.
For the next couple of years I
went into studying Contact Improvi-
sation and Release Technique when I
could, and reconnected with the
practitioners of it, my own genera-
tion, who became my friends and
informed my work. I began to bring
this work over to the Theaterschool,
Modern Dans, which took an im-
mense effort to accomplish. It was
an intense period. And it has contin-
ued since then.
I'm working with Flamenco now,
an old love, in my odd hours. I love
the rhythms. I don't know if it's
going to influence my work, any
more than it already has. I'm also
still working with Tai Chi. This
helped me to find a lot of my basics
with respect to weight and using the
minimal amount of energy-the most
efficient way. This was exactly what
I needed to find in order to develop
my dance technique. Now people are
into Aikido, another wonderful form,
very disciplined and energized.
At the moment I am what I might
call "taking advantage" of the late
twentieth century's developments in
the arts and sciences, on a dance
level, using the body's individual
processing (of ideas and images) to
allow its current language to emerge.
This is leading me into increasing
complexity in movement and in the
choreography-much more set and
less improvised. This creates a very
interesting dialogue with the dancers.
The present piece, Edge of Light is
the outcome of that process. It is a
light piece with the special idiosyn-
crasies of the dancer


-----------------------------

LAMB AT THE ALTAR The Story of a Dance

by Deborah Hay

"What a relief,"
the body speaks.
"No need ignore
dying anymore,
or dance
permanence."

In the Austin-based movement/performance workshop Playing Awake 1991,
dying was the metaphor for playing awake. This came about because I could not
help but notice how much I enjoyed playing dying in the concluding few minutes
of my evening-length solo The Man Who Grew Common In Wisdom. For the
next three years, investing solely in the intelligence of my cellular body as guide. I
explored the perception of the movement of dying. My book, Lamb at the Altar
describes this journey and how the large group workshop functions as a
laboratory for this and other such explorations. The following are excerpts from
Lamb at the Altar.

Lamb a t the Altaris about the whole body of a dancer exploring dying. She
understands dance to include the action of dying, whether or not she chooses to
realize it. She is making an effort to come to terms with dying as an experiential
process of which she possesses negotiable comprehension. She wants to include
the perception of dying in her performance practice because it invigorates her living
each moment. She is not talking about the emotional, psychological, clinical, or
cultural attitudes about dying although she uses the energy surrounding these
bellefs to fire her attention.

I explore the action of dying as a means to expand my capabilities as a movement
artist. My brother plays a pivotal role in this dance. His poetry preys on death.
Only recently does my resistance to his fascination abate. I place his new
manuscript on the dining-room table and walk back to my studio. *Okay, Deborah,
admit your cellular body knows dying." No sooner do 1 have the thought than I am
washed with a force like a deep, dark rushing river. I am pulled along by its
constancy. I stay and stay in the dance, alarmed, awed, humbled, breathless. I
question whether I have ever experienced living, without the yardstick dying now
represents.
⼜
Dying is movement in communion with all there is.

For years changing was the metaphor for my attention to movement. Now I use
dying, taking advantage of the tremendous power, both mine and society's, of
feelings associated with AIDS, war, famine, ecological catastrophe. I seize the
Impact of fear and concern, temporarily lifting it from my head and heart. Activated
by my imagination, I redistribute the energy from hard facts and emotional
pressure, into a bittersweet recognition of dying as perceived by every cell in my
body. The effort to maintain this alternative awareness of dying is equal in intensity
to the consuming negative energy from fearing death.

I cannot identify the feeling of dying as a body process. The action of dying is
without direction, momentum, gravity or shape. I feel running or yearning but
cannot identify a kinesthetle experience with dying. Dying is like seeing. I look at
a diagram of how the eyeball works yet what does it really tell me about seeing?

Dying is our common denominator. Dying is always affecting our being yet few can
describe the feeling Its activity generates. Free from the seduction of a physical
feeling of dying we are thus liberated from doing or not doing it. I am not talking
about death or decay. As a movement arlist I am examining dying, realtzing !
cannot associate a physical feeling with its uninterrupted action on my being.
Dying just 'Is.

I look at the celling and see a dusty black, cotton candy looking surface, trusses,
light fixtures and a skylight. I see a host of unpleasant concrete matter. I know the
celling will not be around forever but I forget to remember this. My culture
supports fixity. I forget to remember impermanence.

I change 'celling into 'Ifetime of celling. I practice remembering to see the
impermanence. Separate parts start to disappear. Names vanish. Content goes.
From here it is an easy jump to commune with the passing of all things. I am
experiencing the death of separateness.
Earlier in my life and career 1 considered being just so as less than admirable. One
of the more remarkable consequences in the practice of dying is the crucial
realtzation that each moment is just so. There is no time to describe how beautiful
or great something is if my attention is cast on this passing present—no time to
dwell on feelings and thoughts. Everything I see becomes just so crucial to realtze
now.

Dying, as a movement practice, is a step toward a non-thinking process. I bypass
the desire to know by acknowledging wherever I am. dying ts. If the reflex to want
to feel or understand dying kicks in, and it often does. I make a deliberate effort to
speed up my movement, not think, toss my witness out in front of me, have her
turn back around to include dying in whatever she see.

The desire to become unconscious is another kind of dying. The seduction to drift
is so powerful that it takes everything in my power to remain present. The destre
for this kind of dying is so profound that I need you to remind me to play awake
now.
Wherever you are, dying is is a trick used to short circuit the deep attachments to
thoughts and feelings about death. With practice, the linear thought, wherever you
are, dying is shrinks to a dot. In other words it becomes possible to reduce the
image, which requires time and energy to produce, to a signal. Wherever you are.
dying is, equals blip.

Admitting the constancy of dying relieves me from trying to identify it. I am
therefore free to appreciate a crucial present, throughout my body at once, as It
passes.

Dying Is an Ignored activity.
Becky Fox (an attorney and a participant in the workshop) -*Isn't it true that if, at
some level, one cannot acknowledge that one is in some way dying at every moment,
then, one is already dead to some aspect of being? Simply put, if you don't know
you're dying, you're already dead."

I play awake in recognition of my attraction to die.
Seeing impermanence is not about scanning one's visual feld. Seeing Imperma-
nence requires admitting nothing I see is forever." From this perspective, wonders
never cease.


-----------------------------------

BEING SEEN, BEING MOVED
Authentic Movement and Performance

by Andrea J. Olsen


Language can only point
towards an experience, it is
not the experience. The
intention of the following
article and the photo captions
is to present possible ways
of experiencing and describing
movement. In Authentic
Movement, the mover remains
the "expert" on his or her
own movement experience—
not the viewer, nor the writer.
[A.J.O.J]


In 1979 after seven years per-
forming and teaching professionally
as a dancer, I began writing a book
on dance chorcography. I wrote
thirteen chapters (on rehearsal pro-
cess, partnering, the use of space...)
before I got to the section on "move-
ment" and realized I had nothing to
say. I was trained in the modern
dance vocabularies of Martha Gra-
ham, José Limon, Erick Hawkins,
and in ballet, but I had no idea how
my own movement was sourced. At
that point I met movement therapist
Janet Adler who introduced me to
Authentic Movement. She was inter-
ested in working with dancers and
choreographers because she felt that
much of what she saw in her studio
was more compelling than what she
saw on stage. Hence I began work-
ing in Authentic Movement and for
over a decade have remained fasci-
nated by its richness as a catalyst for
creative work and for healing.
Authentic Movement is derived
from a process developed by Mary
Starks Whitehouse which she often
referred to as "movement in depth."
Mary was schooled in the dance
techniques of Mary Wigman and
Martha Graham which invoked and
gave form to energies and images
from the unconscious. In the 1950s
she shifted her orientation from artis-
tic to personal/developmental aspects
of dance, and began her lifework
experiencing and describing the pro-
cess of "moving and being moved."!
Mary's work influenced many stu-
dents and associates, including danc-
ers, therapists and educators, and is
currently employed in diverse ways
by practitioners across the country
and in Europe. In 1981, two years
after Mary's death, Janet Adier
formed the Mary Starks Whitehouse
Institute to further study and articu-
late ber experience of the "discipline
of authentic movement."'
The form for Authentic Move-
ment, as taught to me by Janet Adler,
is simple: There is a mover and a
The mover closes her/his
eyes and waits for movement impuls-
es—the process of being moved.
The body is the guide, and the mover
takes a ride on the movement impuls-
cs as they emerge. The witness ob-
serves, sustaining conscious aware-
ness of her/his own experience and
of the mover. After a period of time,
the witness calls the movement ses-
sion to a close, and there is a verbal
dialogue about what occurred. The
mover speaks, and then the witness
reflects back her/his own experience
of the session without judging it.

Ultimately the goal is to internalize a
discerning but nonjudgmental witness
while moving so that we can observe
ourscives without interrupting the
natural flow of our movement. In
this approach to Authentic Move-
ment, the form provides a container
in which to practice entering uncon-
scious material, returning to con-
sciousness, and reflecting on or shap-
ing the experience through speaking
or creative work.
Authentic Movement facilitates
healing as the body guides us into
stored memories and experiences and
toward consciousness. Our history is
stored in our body: evolutionary
movement patterns, human develop-
mental reflexes, and personal experi-
ence. As we close our eyes and
allow ourselves to be moved, endless
diversity emerges.
Much of what we correct in tech-
nique class, for example, can be a
resource in creative work or a call
for attention to physical healing. A
lifted shoulder or a consistently twist-
ed spine may be indications of per-
sonal history. Our imperfection is
our gift. As we learn to listen to the
language of the body, we have a
choice about when and how to work
with a particular movement. Part of
injury and illness is the conflict be-
tween what we tell our body to do
and what it needs to do for healing,
recovery, expression, or safety. Part
of healing is allowing the unex-
pressed to be expressed.
As we begin Authentic Move-
ment we may face basic fears: hatred
of our body, fear of being empty
inside, fear of stillness, fear of being
alone, fear of not being loved.
too fat, I'm too thin. If I'm not
moving, 1 don't exist. If I'm not
seen, I'm nobody. If I don't do
something good, nobody will love
mc." Although these statements may
seem harsh, they occur again and
again in movement sessions. As we
close our eyes and listen to our bod-
ics, there is also the potential of
accepting ourselves just as we arc.
As we replace fear with open
waiting, we can learn how rich our
inner world really is. Often students
ask why their first experience with
Authentic Movement is so serious,
their first dances so sad. Generally
we push into the unconscious what
we consider to be negative-our sad-
ness, our meanness, our fear. But
below that layer of unexpressed
movement is the wealth of human
experience. That is the resource
from which we draw in Authentic
Movement and which we hope to
bring to the stage.
As we use Authentic Movement
as a resource for choreography and
performance, we are developing a
dialogue with our unconscious.
Basically, there are different sources
of movement which have been de-
scribed as: the personal unconscious
(personal story); the collective uncon-
scious (transpersonal and crosscul-
tural); or the superconscious (con-
nected to energies beyond the self).'
Without limiting the spectrum of
movement possibility, we might note
particular modes of movement which
emerge from these sources, including
impulses based purely in sensation
(such as stretching or attending to an
injury), impulses based in reorienting
our consciousness (such as spinning,
walking backwards, rolling), impulses
based in journeying (such as unfold-
ing a movement story), or those
based in emotionally charged or spir-
itually transformative states available
in the body (such as hearing or
speaking inner voices, ritual gestures,
or visitations by specific characters).
These sources and modes are ways of
describing different aspects of our
movement life, and are all part of the
range of Authentic Movement.
Within the experience of "being
moved" where the unconscious is
speaking directly through the body
some motions or positions will be
unformed/hard to remember, some
developing, and others ready for
consciousness. Movement which is
"ready returns again and again, is
easy to remember, and is available,
in my experience, for creative form-
ing.
Movement which is unformed or
developing needs time to unfold. As
we consider dancing for a lifetime,
we recognize that we have time to
develop our creative and physical
resources, so that we are not strip-
mining our unconscious (using every
movement which emerges and put-
ting it on stage) or devouring the
vital resources of our body (burn out
now because we only have so many
years to dance). Our body and our
unconscious develop a dialogue with
our conscious self-a pact of trust
which is constantly being negotiated.
For example, in an injury of the
spine or the ankle the muscles spasm
to protect us from movement. (If we
didn't burt, we would move!) As the
body trusts that we will rest, the
spasm can release. That is the nego-
tiation.
Can we trust ourselves? In per-
sonal/developmental work, we have
to know that a process of change can
and will be supported. For example,
if a difficult memory from childhood
emerges in a movement session, the
mover needs to trust that s/he has the
resources and will take the time to
integrate the experience into con-
scious awareness. Otherwise it is
more appropriate for the memory to
remain unconscious. By internalizing
a supportive, nonjudgmental but
discerning inner witness, we develop
self-trust at a deep level.
The relationship between the
mover and the witness parallels that
of performer and audience. The
multiplicity of the human experience
lives in each of us, and the stage
provides an opportunity to embody
our inner selves by moving as per-
former, or by empathizing or project-
ing as witness. This transference of
awareness between the audience and
the performer enables transformation
for both.' At first, the collective
mind of the audience supports the
surrender of the performer to uncon-
scious energies, but soon the audi-
ence surrenders its awareness of self
and goes with the performer towards
transformation as well. In this con-
text, transformation becomes an
inclusive experience. For example,
in China during a solo concert, when
I dropped my head, the heads in the
room would drop; when I lifted my
focus, the audience's focus would
follow my movement. Performance
became an environment in which
people who were seeing could be
moved.

In my experience, if I am per-
forming well, I am witnessing a
moving audience. I am holding the
witness role as dancer, and the audi-
ence is the mover, and I am support-
ing their journey. Thus, part of the
practice of performing Authentic
Movement is the practice of commu-
nity. At these times, dance becomes
a vehicle for energies beyond the self
which can be invited, or invoked, but
certainly not forced. This exchange
exists as an aspect of "being moved"
which is available to each of us.
Within the spectrum of collective
experience, there is a tremendous
relief both as a mover and as a
watcher as we realize that we are
participants in a larger whole. If we
are attentive to our unconscious, and
others to theirs, there is inherent
order, unfolding, and relationship
which occurs. Group work in Au-
thentic Movement includes experienc-
es of synchronicity, simultancity,
crosscultural motifs, feats of endur-
ance or strength, interactions with
other people and other energies in the
room, extraordinary lifts, and dynam-
ics that could never be planned or
practiced. Injuries are rare; if the
body and psyche are working as one,
anything seems possible and true
limits are respected.

Encountering others in group
work allows development of trust at
a profound level. The basic "rule" in
group work, eyes closed, is that you
follow your own impulses.
moment of contact, the choice to
move with another person is based
on whether or not you can stay true
to your own inner impulses while
working in contact with another
person. As each person follows his
or her own impulses, no one is "re-
sponsible" for taking care of anyone
else. We long to be seen for who we
are in our totality, not for the limited
view of who we present ourselves to
be, or who others imagine or want us
to be. The practice of Authentic
Movement in group work is the
practice of being true to who we are
in the presence of others.
There are several ways in which
Authentic Movement is useful in
performance. Authentic Movement
Informs performance. Its practice
gives us information about our own
personal movement material that
helps us decide whether to explore it
for ourselves in the studio, extend it
into therapeutic work, or bring it to
the stage. One of my earliest discov-
eries with Authentic Movement was
how much the body has to tell us.
Simply by letting my body move me
instead of trying to control it, fasci-
nating movement and useful insights
would emerge. I felt the expansive-
ness of my own vocabulary as a
dancer, rather than wondering if I
could come up with one more evo-
cative or unusual movement in the
studio. When I taught a group of
students, the same richness was pres-
ent in each person's movement. It
was a humbling lesson in the univer-
sality of individual uniqueness.
Authentic Movement also informs
our viewing of dance. As we prac-
tice witnessing we begin to recognize
authentic states and become aware of
our own projection, noticing the
extent to which what we are reading
into someone's movement is our own
material, how much is theirs, or how
much is a shared state. Then we can
more clearly identify unconscious
content in our own work—-read our
own dances, and facilitate others to
notice their unique movement lan-
guage. Whether Authentic Move-
ment is the criteria we want to use to
watch performance is a choice; it
informs, but it is only one of many
ways to view movement.
Authentic Movement is also a
resource for performance. The
ongoing practice of Authentic Move-
ment provides a scrapbook of images
movements, and energetic states
which can be drawn on in the cho-
reographic process or in an improvi-
sational performance. In my carly
work with Authentic Movement, I
felt that the practice gave me the
emotional subtext for a dance. For
example, the first full-evening picce
that I created from Authentic Move-
ment was called In My House and it
unfolded in its entirety in a one-
morning Authentic Movement ses-
sion-seven sections with specific
movement vocabulary. I could de-
velop it any way I wanted, but the
emotional and structural clarity had
been established within me.
For performers, the practice al-
lows movement patterns learned from
others to become integrated with
personal experience. Sessions also
facilitate a kind of house-cleaning of
habitual movement patterns which
need to be processed at the level of
the unconscious and released before
beginning new work.
Authentic Movement also exists
as performance. An increasing
number of dancers are presenting the
practice of Authentic Movement in a
performance context. In questioning
whether the Authentic Movement
experience itself is transmittable or
whether it needs another form or
frame to allow for transmission, I
participated in an Authentic Move-
ment performance series with a core
group of dancers who had worked
together in Authentic Movement for
many years. We tried five monthly
performances and after each, one or
more of the performers was sick—
with the flu for example.
We had used Authentic Move-
ment in choreographed work quite a
lot, and in other forms of improvisa-
tion without problems, so we tried
variations to develop a safer contain-
er for showing the work: adding
music, having eyes open, having a
witness in the audience, having some
performers who were sourcing in a
more traditional dance mode, as well
as presenting the pure practice as
performance. Eventually we consid-
ered two possible causes of the post-
performance illnesses: while perform-
ing we were merging with our watch-
ers and were not establishing bound-
aries, so we picked up whatever was
present emotionally and physically in
the room, overloading our systems;
or we were exposing unconscious
material which needed the process of
dialoguing directly afterwards for
completion.
Whether or not the raw authentic
movement state can be sustained and
transmitted in a performance setting,
it is generally agreed that "good"
performance-choreography, improv-
isation, authentic movement, etc.—is
authentic. It includes the sensation
of moving and being moved, a merg-
ing of unconscious and conscious
states, and a moment by moment
unfolding of the performer and the
work.
As Authentic Movement informs
performance, the underlying motive
and hence the nature of performance
changes. There are years in perfor-
mance when we may be driven by
our need to be seen, when our ego
seeks validation, when we must
shape and control, when we desire to
transform and know other parts of
ourselves, or when we are compelled
to create rituals of experience for
others. These motivations may
change during our lives as perform-
ers. Dancing at twenty is different
than dancing at forty or sixty.
At a mature level, a performer
has an articulate, discerning inner
witness which allows authentic con-
nections to occur on stage. As we
internalize our own witness and lose,
in effect, our need to be seen by
others, new performance motivations
arise. What might these be? The
practice of being seen being authen-
tic, in an era where the superficial
takes precedence. The practice of
connecting to energies beyond the
self, in an era where spirituality is
shapeless. The practice of participat-
ing in a community of exchange
between dancers and watchers, in an
cra where dance has been removed
from most people's lives.
Authentic Movement points to a
process of recognition between mov-
er and witness, performer and audi-
ence. As we feel seen, we can see.
As we feel heard, we can begin to
hear others. As we develop an artic-
ulate and supportive inner witness,
we can allow others their own expe-
rience of moving and being moved.
The process of listening to the move-
ment stories of our body encourages
us to know ourselves and to bring
this awareness to performance.


THE MOVER AND THE WITNESS.
The mover closes het/his eyes and waits
for movement impulses-the process of
being moved. The witness holds the
consciousness and obsorvos. By intomal-
izing a supportive, nonjudgmental witness,
we develop self-trust at a deep level.

PHOTOGRAPHS by Erik Borg were
taken in collaboration with colleagues
Daphne Lowell, Caryn McHose, Joan
Miller, Mary Ramsey, Susan Waltner,
and Alton Wasson with whom I have
worked in Authentic Movement during
the last decade, as part of an Authentic
Movement Photo Project, June 1992,
partially funded by an Ada Howe Kent
Research Grant from Middlebury Col.
lege.

CONTACT. In the moment of contact,
the choice to move with another person
is based on whether or not you can
stay true to your own inner impulses
while working in contact with another
person. Encountering others in group
work allows development of trust at a
profound level.

REORIENTATION. Movements which
disorient our consciousness-spinning.
walking backwards, rolling-stimulate
reflexive responses, thus facilitating the
process of entering unconscious states.

TRANSFORMATIVE STATES (o.g.,
hearing or speaking inner voices, ritual
gestures, or visitations by specific char-
acters). In these moments, dance is a
vehicle for energies beyond the self
which can be invited, or invoked, but
cortainly not forcod.

EMPATHIZING AND PROJECTING.
The multiplicity of the human experienco
lives in each of us, and the stage provides
an opportunity to embody our inner solves
by moving as performer, or by empathiz-
ing or projecting as witnoss.

SPEAKING. At the end of the movement
session, the mover may choose to speak,
draw, or in other ways give form to the
experience. The witnoss reflects back
her/his own experience of the session. In
Authentic Movement, the form provides a
container in which to practice entering
unconscious material, retuming to con-
sciousness, and reflecting on or shaping
the experience through speaking or cre-
ative work. Each mover needs to know
that she has the support and resourcos to
integrato their

---------------------------------

SACRED ENDING

by Linda Ugelow 

I'm struck by the timing of my father's death and the writing of this newsletter. I had wanted to
focus this issue on the experience of witnessing in Authentic Movement: the witnessing of ourselves and
tho witnossing of others. I wrote on this subject for several weeks. Then my father's lymphoma took a
sudden tum for tho worse and I was urgently called to New York to visit him in the hospital.
As I knelt by the foot of the bed gazing at this man with deep affection, I thought of the many hours spent
watching my students both moving and breathing in relative stillness. And the thought passed through my
mind that all my work, my meditation and Authentic Movement practice, had propared me for this day;
clarity of presence in the presence of my father dying. And as I often feel in my work, I felt the privilege
and gift to be allowed to witness this intimate process.
I watched the quality of Dad's broathing shift over the hours. For a while, his eyes were open and he
somed to bo looking back at mo. At times he would struggle, seem restless or pull at tha axygen mask.
His breath became noisy and gasping. I felt the pain of suffering and constriction in my own heart and
lungs. Occasionally his efforts would be punctuated by a sigh and I would silently or softly offer him
encouragement in relaxing.
I'd look around at the others witnessing with me. My sister, Susan, had a look I'd never seen before, like a
woman in love. And I felt such relief when my other sister, Judith, finally arrived from Denmark.
Dad's breath suddenly shifted, his inhalations became long and gentle. I stood up and leaned over him.
Softly, I spoke the images in my mind. It's as if he's falling asleop. Look, his breathing is so gentle now.
so easy. We all watched, completely present, witnessing this man with fuzzy gray hair around his temples.
I falt so poacaful, so entranced. His breath lengthened and softened even more, like a ripple in the water
flowing away. We watched as every hint of movement, of life itself, disappoared
In that moment a wail poured out of the group collected around the bod. While he was in his body, we had
hold a serene space, but now that his spirit had left, we responded with our voicos all the feelings
contained insido,
As a witness, I could only imagine what it was like to die. I had so many questions / wanted to ask. What
were you experiencing as you tugged at the oxygon mask? Could you hear me when I whispered "I love
you" in your ear? What was it like to slip away? Was it as lovely as it soomed?
Some days later I asked Susan if she thought Dad knew that Judith had arrived, Oh, yes, sho said, I saw
his chest relax with a big sigh. I asked Judith, too. Oh, yes, she said, I saw a tear form in the comer of
his eye.
Witnessing is a special way of being with the self and being with another. We begin with an attitude of
reverence, care and trust in the body and its wisdom. When I watch others move, I witness with my whole
body. I track not only the flow of events taking place in the room, but also the flow of response taking
place inside me in the form of sensations, thoughts, feelings and images. These are my own projections
about what might be going on for the mover, but they are secondary to remaining receptive and compas-
sionate. I try to sense and hold the energy present in the room. As with my family, the sharing of
experience strongthens the fabric through which we feal connected to and supported by the world and
those around us.

-------------------------

Women With Wings
A movement theater support group for HIV-positive women

by Maria St. John


Women With Wings was the name of a support
group for HIV-positive women started by Anna
Halprin in 1989, which I facilitated for three years.
The group changed its name three times (the final
name was "Body Talk"), worked in at least four
different studios, and expanded and contracted as
participants came and went. What remained con-
sistent throughout was our commitment to attending
to our bodies in order to be of use to one another
in the face of the AIDS epidemic. This attention
produced the body-based therapeutic tools discussed
here. I wrote the paper shortly before the group
disbanded. A new group may begin soon, consist-
ing of a mix of old and new participants. [M.S.J.]


Stretch your arms and take hold of the cloth of your clothes
with both hands. The cure for the pain is in the pain.
Good and bad are mixed.
When one of us gets lost, is not here, he must be inside us.
-Rumi

Women With Wings is a support group for HIV-posi-
tive women. In addition to verbal support structures, the
group uses movement and body-oriented theater exercises
as tools for identifying, expressing, and working through
issues which HIV infection evokes. This group is on-
going. Participants commit to working with the group for
at least four months, and are welcome to continue indefi-
nitely after that. The group consists of a minimum of five
and a maximum of ten participants at any given time.
Women With Wings was started by movement educator
Anna Halprin, who works with people with cancer and
HIV infection, using movement as an alternative treatment
method or as an adjunct to more traditional Western medi-
cal treatments. Halprin's original HIV group was made up
of fifteen men and one woman. This single female partici-
pant felt that many of the issues surrounding HIV infection
were different for women than for men. She encouraged
Halprin to start Women With Wings as a support group for
HIV-positive women.
The group meets for three-hour sessions. We work in a
large, empty dance studio with wooden floors and no
mirrors. We begin each session with a verbal check-in.
This is followed by a guided meditation/relaxation exercise.
From there the participants move into improvisational
movement explorations which I structure.
Then there is a second verbal check-in, this one incorporating 
material that has arisen in the movement work—-physical 
sensations, emotional states, and thought or image associations. 
Finally we use this material to create "individual scores."
pants have a role in each score, although sometimes the
role is simply to "witness" and then discuss the others'
work. A role could be any of the following: a body part
(so that an ailing body part would have a voice, for exam-
ple), a "voice" one hears inside (so that internalized atti-
tudes, assumptions, and expectations can be identified and
addressed), or a person (so that a difficult family or social
situation can be role-played). A score can be elaborately
designed or largely improvised. After performing each
was designed to address.
What follows is a discussion of three major functions
which this therapeutic approach serves for the participants.
Integrating embodiment
The first time the group assembled, there was an over-
whelming feeling of relief at being together in one place as
HIV-positive women. Although each participant has by
now integrated into her sense of herself a feeling of be-
longing to this community, there are still times when sim-
ply being together physically seems to provide the most
vital therapeutic element.
During one session the participants felt that the initial
group movement exercise was meeting a crucial need.
They didn't want to follow our usual pattern of working on
each person's individual material during the second half of
the session. As we discussed how we might continue to
explore movement which expressed the group-as-a-whole,
one participant had the image of everyone moving as if she
were part of the internal works of a big clock. Everyone
was attracted to this image and as we explored it in our
One of the effects of HIV infection is that the women
live with a constant sense of an accelerated biological clock
or a time bomb ticking in their ears. They wanted to use
the time they had together simply to listen to their own
rhythms, move to their own ticking, take their own sweet
time.
They spent the rest of the session moving together.
The movement began mechanically, inspired by the clock-
work image. The strong pulsing rhythm they established
soon gained momentum and they moved into looser, fuller
movement expression that built to a frenzied crescendo.
Finally they slowed down and rested together, listening to
one another's breathing. It was one of our most wordless
sessions, and it is remembered by the group as one of the
most profound.
Bypassing language altogether and working exclusively
with our physical bodies is not, however, the primary
purpose of the group. Rather, we assume with Joyce
McDougall that emotions form "the privileged link between
psyche and soma,' and we work with language to describe
these connections. A network of feedback loops is attend-
ed to and expressed in which physical sensations provide
access to emotional states, linguistic associations uncover
psychic struggles, and verbal and nonverbal explorations
give way to previously suppressed, repressed or denied ele-
ments of experience.
Two examples will demonstrate the functioning of these
processes. Connie was working one day with the theme of
a relationship she had determined to end. She had just that
morning given her lover an ultimatum ("give me what I
need from you or I'm leaving") to which she was afraid
that she herself might not adhere, compromising instead in
compliance with a self-defeating pattern.
Connie was harshly scornful of herself for this antici-
pated failure. She stood in the middle of the studio floor
announcing bitterly, "I'm so tired of myself. I've been
here before. I know I'll just end up going back to her." I
asked her (as I often do) to move while she spoke. She
was annoyed at my request (in spite of its usualness!) and
said with some irritation that she couldn't move because
she had a pain in her side.
I asked her to put her hands on the place where she felt
the pain. She did, and then looked at me expectantly. I
asked her, "What's there?" My love handles," she re-
sponded promptly, and as though it were a stupid question.
Then she heard her own words and began to cry, connect-
ing with the strong feeling that had so far been inaccessible
to her. The phrase "love handles," she explained, captured
the strong sense of attachment she felt to her lover. Her
lover "had a hold of her" in a very real way. Realizing
this afforded Connie the self-compassion she needed in
order to tolerate the painful ambivalence of a potential
breakup.
A similar example is more directly HIV-related. Maya
was working with the theme of her chronic fatigue. In her
score she enacted a fantasy she had of her own funeral. At
the funeral someone gave a culogy in which they listed all
the things Maya had done in the three years since she
tested positive. (The list was extensive, including commu-
nity service work, AIDS organizing, career changes, travel,
relationships, and athletics. These were all things Maya
had in fact been doing since testing positive.)
Maya delivered the list in a monotone voice with an
expressionless face. In the middle of the monologue she
stopped abruptly and asked in distress, "Why doesn't all
this sound impressive to me? It scems like, so what? It
seems like nothing." I asked her where in her body she
felt her fatigue. "My lungs," she answered without hesita-
tion. I asked her to speak from there. She spoke as her
lungs. They said to her, "You never stop. We expand and
then contract and than rest for a beat. You never rest. We
need you to rest with us. We can't do this without you."
Like Connie, Maya cried as she connected with this
part of herself that had been silenced. Her fear of her
fatigue had been so great that she had hardly allowed
herself to rest. She could not fully enjoy or take pride in
her accomplishments because they were motivated in part
by a fear of not doing, rather than an impuse or desire to
do. When she gave voice to her own weary body, and
listened to it, she was able to have compassion for the
fatigue instead of fear and hatred. In my process notes that
day 1 reflected,
It is this difficulty in laying oneself down the fear
that it will be the beginning of the end, that it will
mean admitting defeat, losing control, that one will
never rise again-this seems to me to be the most
harrowing part of living with HIV.
Indeed, remembering to rest is typical of the kinds of
messages the participants take from our sessions. The
group supports one another in attending to their bodies,
paying attention to their own (evolving) powers and limits,
and taking their own psychic processes as their guides.
These practices are crucial because, as the group's state-
ment of purpose describes,
There are a lot of people with a lot of ideas about
how we should and should not live our lives as
HIV-positive women. Our bodies are the battle-
grounds for raging political wars and the screens
for overwhelming cultural projections.
There is no right way to live with HIV infection, but
there are countless decisions to be made. One participant
recently decided to stop taking AZT because she felt she
had been sick more frequently on it than she would have
been had she not taken it in the first place. Her doctor
advised her to continue with it, insisting that her nausea
and beadaches were not side effects, but stress-related
somatizations. The participants of Women With Wings use
the work to explore their own relationships to HIV, to
define their own treatment plans, and to find their own
paths through the confusing cultural construction of AIDS.

///

"We are HIV-positive women. We come
together to create community because we
are isolated around HIV-related issues in
many areas of our lives. Although our life
situations, our identities, and our approach-
es to living with HIV vary greatly, we are
committed to supporting one another in turn-
ing to our own bodies and our own psyches
as our authorities.....

///

Practicing disorientation

There are many details and dimensions of HIV disease,
however, that cannot be decided or controlled. As impor-
tant as it is for the participants of Women With Wings to
use their work together to find their way, their constant
getting lost in it is perhaps ultimately the most important
part of the work.
It is in this respect that I take issue with certain psy-
chotherapists who work with people with AIDS. Cohen
and Abramowitz, for example, assert that "the psychothera-
peutic challenge is to help the person with AIDS to maxi-
mize the cobesiveness, firmness and vitality of the embat-
tled, destabilized self."* On the contrary, an important part 

of the work the women do together in Women With Wings
is about making room for the not-firm, not-cohesive and
even the not-vital parts of themselves.
For example, Maxine dances sitting down when her
neuropathy causes her unbearable pain in her legs. Connie
spent an entire score curled in fetal position, repeating over
"No more pills. I won't swallow any more
pills." Louise wondered one day why she felt compelled to
move with her arms raised above her head. She thought
she must be reaching for something but she couldn't figure
out what it would be. Upon further exploration she discov-
ered that the gesture meant instead, "I give up."
We work with improvisation in the group because it
entails a perpetual opening up to the unknown, the unex-
pected, the unfamiliar, and often the undesired. What
arises in an improvisation is often that thing that has been
relegated to the unconscious precisely because bringing it
to consciousness seems painful or dangerous. When one
improvises, one accepts as the norm a state of being lost.
We move into our blind spots, we back into our fears, we
turn into our monsters and our mothers.
In her description of a particular approach to improvisa-
tion, contact improvisor Nancy Stark Smith says,
Improvisation is a practice in disorientation-train-
ing the reflexes to read confusion as a challenge,
not a threat-that a moment eur loose from its
moorings has the advantage of being able to move
in any direction, and further, that a temporary
absence of reference points can clear the way for
impulses from unexpected quarters."'
Practicing disorientation is as crucial to women living with
HIV as striving for stability or clarity may be. We proceed
often from a point of blindness in Women With Wings.
We move into an empty room with nothing but our unpre-
dictable bodies, and we respond to what arises. In a partic-
ular movement exploration, Helene found herself moving
as a sand crab scurrying around looking for a rock. She
said in the discussion,
Every time I get sand all around me and get settled
another wave comes in the form of an HIV-related
article in the paper or a new drug that doesn't
work or somebody making a comment in line at the
grocery store, and all the sand is swept away again
and there I am vulnerable and exposed, scurrying
for shelter.

Holding ambiguity
Closely related to this practice in disorientation is the
final function of the body-based interventions I will address
here: holding ambiguity.
HIV infection often seems to confirm in women a
deeply felt sense of shame and defectiveness. Self-repudia-
tion in the form of hatred for one's body is common
among women but may be concretized and apparently
rationalized by HIV infection. A frequent response (for
both HIV-positive and HIV-negative women) is to become
radically alienated from our bodies to punish, endanger,
injure, starve and mutilate them, and to refuse to listen to
them, care for them, or see them as part of us; in effect, to
disown them.
This tendency toward alienation can be reinforced by
the alien quality an infected body can take on. T-cell
counts hover or dip for no traceable reason and with no
palpable effects. The body comes to represent the potenti-
ality of unfathomable suffering and loss. Our faces are
rubbed in what has for most of us been the infuriating and
humiliating fact that we cannot control our bodies.
The path of HIV disease is completely unpredictable.
Some people remain asymptomatic. There have been
reported cases of people testing positive and subsequently
testing negative. Some people get sick and then get better
for many years. Some people move rapidly from good
health to death. To live with an HIV-infected body is to
live with ambiguity. Brenda spent her first few months with the group feel-
ing painfully awkward in her body, very self-conscious and
unable to be spontancous. One day she called me between
sessions and told me she thought she should drop out of
the group because she was less "talented" than anyone else
and she felt she was a hindrance to the group. We dis-
cussed the possibility of her coming and working in the
group with these feelings of inadequacy.
She did continue and during the next session I noticed
that whenever she moved at all, Brenda kept her head as
still as possible. I pointed this out to her and suggested
that she engage her head with the movement of the rest of
her body. Her movement became strikingly full and free,
to her own rather shy delight.
In discussing her experience she talked about the fact
that "keeping her head out of the movement" had kept her
from identifying with her own body, and had maintained
her in a harshly critical relationship with it. Engaging her
head in the movement allowed her to experience herself as
a moving body. She said, "I left my body when I contract-
ed the virus and I haven't felt in it until today."
Brenda experienced herself here as a body rather than
as having a body. This enabled her to open up to the
pleasurable and liberating sensations to which her body is
uniquely able to provide access. She had been depriving
herself of these experiences because she could only repre-
sent her body to herself in negative ways (as clumsy, bad,
dirty, damaged, etc.). Her work in this session marked the
beginning of her process of negotiating new representations
of and to herself.
Helene's story offers another example of how body-
oriented group work can assist participants in learning to
hold the ambiguity which the body represents. During her
first session with the group. Helene expressed her relief
that Women With Wings wouldn't be "one more group
where everybody sits around complaining and getting each
other down." She was so insistent upon maintaining a
"positive attitude" that when Maya said in her check-in
"my boyfriend's sexism is killing me," Helene interrupted
to ask "could you please not use that expression, 'killing
me'?" She could stand to entertain only positive affirma-
tions. Her hates and dreads were strictly banished from her
conscious experience.
Although we have not addressed Helene's original
intolerance for ambiguity directly, it is clear to me from
her work that some staggering changes have taken place in
her. In her individual score last week Helene worked with
the image of a beautiful, old, overgrown graveyard which
she had discovered on a walk. The participants were to

represent the gravestones and she was to be the wind blow-
ing around them.
In this score the participants were literally cmbodying
the potentiality of death for Helene, and she was dancing
among them. Simply through being with the other partici-
pants in a way that is attentive to bodies has allowed
Helene to be with the ambiguity that HIV infection makes
corporal. I am reminded of T.S. Eliot's description of
embodying ambiguity in The Four Quartets. He says,
I said to my soul, be still, and wait without hope
For hope would be hope for the wrong thing;
wait without love
For love would be love of the wrong thing;
there is yet faith
But the faith and the love and the hope
are all in the waiting.
Wait without thought, for you are not ready for
thought:
So the darkness shall be the light,
and the stillness the dancing.
Closing Thoughts
HIV infection often amplifies for women deeply rooted
ambivalences in relation to their bodies which are fostered
through gender-specific socialization processes. Paradoxi-
cally, while HIV infection may exaggerate a woman's
sense of alienation from her body, it also forces her to
reckon with her own embodiedness in new ways. Some
women are able to take on their bodies consciously as they
never have before and thereby to conceive new and more
compassionate self-representations.
Therapeutic work which attends to bodily experience
and addresses it on its own terms (i.e., which "speaks"
directly to the body as well as "listening" to it) is uniquely
able to assist in this process. By responding to one another
specifically as embodied subjects, women can enact a
reparation of the aspects of ourselves which have been
culturally severed and devalued.


"...For three hours on alternate Sunday
afternoons we gather to make our way
through. We move together, reading our
bodies for our current impulses, sensations
and desires. We talk and we sing, articulat-
ing the multitudes of voices within. We ex-
plore the constantly shifting landscapes of
our imaginations and associations. We en-
act together scenes from our psyches, mov-
ing always toward the openings. We dis-
cover choices where we had not perceived
them. Elements move which had been stat-
ic. We find ourselves supported where we
had been alone."
from Statement of Purpose
Women With Wings


---------------

DRAFTING INTERIOR TECHNIQUES

by Steve Paxton

How awkwardly we are damned if we don't or if we
do. I thought to myself after the European Contact Confer-
ence in Berlin in 1988. During a lecture event I had been
asked, "Just what is Contact Improvisation?" and I had
muffed the answer. I was being asked by a woman with an
attitude, in the presence of a number of veteran contactors,
general public, and students, and I hesitated in order to think
how the question should be answered for the whole group.
The discussion up to that point had been full of historical
revisions, elisions, pointed remarks about Americentric
heavy-footedness. In short, the European contactors consid-
ered themselves second generation users of this form and
wanted to know if they had to go through every step the
Americans had gone through; and a few people who had
come to the conference without prior experience just want
an explanation of what this whole thing was and how it was
run and how did one improve and get recognition-things
like that, which would be reasonable questions in a normal
organization.
The journal you are now reading had, among other things,
been working for 15 years to elaborate on the basic answer
to "what is CI?" And as time has gone on, the answer has
shifted: away from an experimental dance phenomenon and
toward a physical practice allied with a number of complex
new body and mind studies. I have come to think of contact
improvisation as a physical event best described negatively—
not art, not sport, not most of the things which characterize
dancing in this century.
But I hate to describe things in the negative. It is
accurate, but the mystics used it first and I don't like using
their devices, which were used to try to inform students in
conversations about the ineffable.
We, on the other hand, are trying to describe the corpore-
al. But it is no longer easy to do so. It is, in fact, getting
more difficult. We now know too much, or think we do; the
corporeal seems to be a complexity of social, physical,
geometric, glandular, political, intimate, and personal infor-
mation which is not easily renderable.
Once things were relatively simple. I thought I knew how
this then-nameless work should not be described. It was to
be an improvisation without any ambiguous appeals to the
imagination, because I did not know precisely what "the
imagination" was (in fact I thought doing this work might
educate me to the meanings of imagination, improvisation
etc.). For the same reason there should be no mention of
sexuality, psychology, spirituality. I would leave these in the
hands of the experts and proceed with what seemed more
immediate-the senses and the physical body.
It did seem that before I could begin to train the senses of
students, something had to happen in their brains.
recognizing that we do not begin to move from zero, that first
we have a desire or image to launch the system into action,
I decided that I had to work in the area of images, though
cautiously. The images were to be, well, "real." That is,
they were not to be obviously unreal.
The effect of obviously unreal images upon the body is
fascinating. For example, if you are told to imagine (that
word!) your head is filled with a gas that's lighter than air,
it is difficult not to respond with neck extension and postura
straightening. Why should this be so?
It may be related to the sort of mobilization which
happens when we are searching for a lost object-first, the
thought of the object, then the eye movements, the head
turning, standing up, facing in different directions, a tentative
walk to a new viewpoint or a possible site of the object. All
this prompted by the mental image of the desired object.
The responsiveness of the body to the image is innate,
apparently, and with this innate connection the body may be
responsive to any image the mind holds. But this is specula-
tion about things which should be the subject of investiga-
Without a theory of imagination to support our
investigations, it seemed to me, we would have to improvise
without fictitious gasses in the head—if that were possible.
At any rate, I had only about a weck to come to convey
the central idea before we, a group of apt students and
myself, would be doing it in public at the John Weber
Gallery in NYC each afternoon. This time pressure meant
that this effect of images on the body would be an essential
tool for quickly transmitting the initial states which would let
this physical duct/improvisation manifest as directly as
possible.
The first job was to point out this image-action connec-
tion. Then, exercises which demonstrate it in various parts
of the body had to be produced. For instance, a mental
exercise I gave while people were standing, in which they
were to "imagine, but don't do it, imagine that you are about
to take a step forward with your left foot. What is the
difference? As you were. Imagine... (repeat). Imagine that
you are about to take a step with your right foot. Your left.
Right. Left. Standing."
At this point, small smiles sometimes appeared on
people's faces and I suspected they felt the effect. They had
gone on an imaginary walk and had felt their weight respond-
ing subtly (but really) to the image; so when "Standing" was
said, the smiles revealed that they got the small joke. They
realized that I knew about the effect. We had arrived at an
invisible (but real) place together.
The stand was useful. The basic event was standing and
observing the body. This was an exercise in itself, though
a very reductive one. What gets exercised in there, inside the
standing body, is the habit of observation; a noticeable
movement of consciousness through the body. Within this
exercise there are encounters with parts of the body which
tick along or breathe along as we watch. It clearly seems to
be one sub-system, consciousness, examining others.
The other sub-systems are not obviously connected to the
wandering consciousness, except that the encounter happens
in what one calls "my body." The consciousness-as-observer
regards the other sub-systems as separate from itself.
The consciousness can travel inside the body. It is
analogous to focusing the eyes in the external world. There
is also an analogue for peripheral vision, which is the
awareness of the whole body with senses open. Knowing
these things and practicing them are different things, of
course. We know far more than we can practice. We had to
decide what to practice.

One choice was the tiny movements the body makes while
standing. I felt they were examples of reflex actions. They
were not directed by the observing consciousness. Observ-
ing them might train the consciousness to understand reflex
speed without going through an emergency experience which
is when we're most often aware of our reflexes.
We would be provided with many examples of reflex
action when we began improvising in contact, but they might
because the consciousness can easily
turn off to the experience of these reflexive moments. In
other words, we can do something without "knowing" it.
This successfully preserves the integrity of the body but does
not train the consciousness; it leaves a hole in the knowing
of the experience. Could the consciousness learn to see these
gaps of awareness? Or, if not, could it at least learn to
observe reflexive action calmly during the highly adrenalized
Why is full consciousness so important to me? Because
consciousness can be felt to change according to what it
experiences. If a gap of consciousness occurs at a critical
moment, we lose an opportunity to learn from the moment.
A black-out lasting fractions of a second during a roll is not
acceptable as full consciousness of the roll, and the gap will
remain embedded in the movement as part of the over-all
feeling of the movement. If consciousness stays open during
these critical moments, it will have an experience of them,
and will enlarge its concept to match the new experience.
This expanded picture becomes the new ground for moving.
My speculation is that the gaps are moments when
consciousness goes away. I don't know where. But I think
I know why. Something is happening which is too fast for
thought. For instance, the navigation of space is normally
done with head erect and visual impressions comfortably
constant, with the horizon's horizontality remaining an
important reference for our orientation. When this visual
reference changes too rapidly for our (rather slow) conscious-
ness to comprehend, as in spinning, rolling, and other
"disorienting" movement, something reflexive and much
faster than consciousness takes over. We play with this dual
aspect of ourselves on carnival rides, or when learning to turn
Dizziness and nausea are, I think, signals that we have
reached the borderland between these two aspects of physical
control-conscious and reflexive. When we linger in the
borderland on purpose, we become our own experiment. We
are subjecting the reflexes to stimuli so our consciousness can
watch them jump. Normally, consciousness easily slips out
reflexes step in, and then step aside again, as in the blink of
an eye where most of the time we are unaware of any gap in
our visual continuity.
Visual continuity is one of many ways we know "where
we are," and not knowing where we are is experienced as an
emergency situation. How many times a day, or an hour, do
we re-orient, I wonder. At any rate, contact improvisation
constantly challenges one's orientation: visual, directional,
balance, and where in the body the consciousness is posi-
tioned. The challenge to orientation is not just in the more
acrobatic aspects of the movement. Students were sometimes
made nauseous by noticing their internal space while standing
still. This, oddly enough, is probably a form of motion-
sickness, which has been described as having a moving deck
under one's feet but a steady horizon. In the stand, one
experiences still feet and moving consciousness inside the
body. In rolling or turning, the room seems (from the point
of view of the eyes) to move, while the floor remains stable
to the touch. What I had to do was resolve the problem of
orientation so that the consciousness could stay aware of the
movement. A chicken and egg problem

Everyone in this group was athletic and many of them
were dancers, so presumably their consciousness had already
been informed by body movement. But they weren't being
asked to do what they knew how do to. They were being
asked to improvise; to do (or allow themselves to do) what
they didn't expect to do. Under these circumstances previ-
ously learned movement techniques often hamper rather than
help the desired sort of manifestation. Movement techniques
are useful for other reasons, of course, but not for examining
gaps of consciousness during unexpected movement.
Consciousness, supported by a collection of images and
internal observations which reinforced each other, had a job.
It should not press the body, nor engage in time travel out
of the body into memories or schedules because these bring
images which will also affect the body, distracting from the
improvisation at hand. In this improvisation the conscious-
ness was to hang in with the body, during real time, and stay
alert. It should be a witness.
This sort of consciousness-awareness of the present
physical reality— is familiar to all of us. In fact the reason
it is useful is that it is commonly understood, though employ-
ing it requires choices. Without a process of sorting we are
confronted with such a variety of current physical images that
we are inundated rather than guided into a practice

As the right kind of images were found, a working model
began to emerge in my mind. The working model was based
on aspects of an experience that I'd had while working with
another person, in which an interesting event occurred and
was confirmed by both of us. Moments of the duet, typically
manifesting as "accidental" and flowing streams of move-
ment, were for both of us pleasant, highly stimulating, and
elemental. With other partners, more confirmations. It was
worth pursuing.
The working model was predicated on this experience and
a desire to articulate the experience so others could find it.
If others did find it, we were perhaps examining a basic
mode of communication between the reflexes of people in
physical contact as they moved. It was an idea which took
two people to have. It wasn't wrestling, embracing, sex,
social dancing, though it was an element of all of those. It
needed a name, so we could refer to it without unwanted
connotations. Contact Improvisation...?
To envision the exercises, I took the working model to be
a simple imaginary person with no physical, sensorial, or
social inhibitions. It was a generic person with positive
elements I had observed in many students, dancers, martial
artists, and children. I had met such a being in my partners
when we were doing "it," the duet phenomenon. I had been
such a being to them, apparently, when they too confirmed
the moment. It had to be a fairly simple model, because the
users (the students and I) were actually functioning human
beings with more possible neuronal connections than there are
particles in the universe. I could not cope with that of
course, nor other evident human complexities. In terms of the
safety of the body in active interaction with another body,
though, I saw I could ask the student to concentrate on
movement and how it feels, and then suggest concentrating
on the sensations of their weight, momentum, friction, the
touch of their partner, the sensation of the floor under their
body, and to lear to maintain their peripheral vision of the
space. The working model had these characteristics and
others equally easy to understand. These were aimed at
security, not at improvising. I recall saying that improvising
could not be taught, though it could be learned.
But I did think that safcty could be taught. "Keep your
knees over your toes," for instance, is taught to students of
dance. With the characteristics of the working model
developed and understood by the students, I hoped they
would be safe even if they were ass-over-teakettle.
I pressed on. I made assumptions. I assumed I could
explain things directly to the body ("notice gravity"). I
assumed the body knew what I was talking about (gravity,
usually ignored, moves into focus as a sensation of weight).
I assumed that the body, having evolved for millions of
years on this planet, was tuned first by planetary things which
create our potentials, and second by cultural things which
develop select parts of the potential. This is in line with
some current theories about how we acquire language; we are
born with potential to make the variety of human sounds and
language connections, but are guided into the specific 
language of our culture, and the unused potential withers with
disuse.
For the working model, the basic question was— potential
for what? What had the culture physically suppressed or
selected out which we might reclaim? We may, with a bit of
experience of sub-cultures of our own, and other cultures,
understand something of what our culture requires of us for
inclusion: certain gestures, modes of posture and behav-
ior-body language, as they say-which constitute proper
social activities and communications, as well as the accompa-
nying mental attitudes we acquire or aspire to for proper
presentation of our 'selves'. Indeed, the very idea of a 'self'
is probably a cultural construction.
In sports and dance the rules of physical behavior are
altered from the basic social behaviors to encompass activities
understood to be outside the social norm but allowable in a
controlled way. These activities require different sensing
modes than does the usual body language we must learn for
eating in company or attending school. The working model
and its characteristics were like sports and dance in that they
were altered. However, they depart from one another in how
they are learned. Contact Improvisation behavior evolves
from sensing movement; dance and sports, from attempting
movement and then letting the senses fall into line, or not
As to how we are educated... Not to become too em-
broiled in this, we may simply note that most of us learn to
sit still and focus our attention for hours each day.
missing potential here is obvious - movement of the body and
varieties of peripheral sensing.
Our alterations involved the investigation of space, time,
and mass with senses in peripheral sensing mode: space
becomes spherical, time is the present, mass is a changeable
orientation to gravity.
In devising an approach to this working model of the
body, I skipped blithely by constraints and taboos of touch-
ing, because people are accustomed to ignoring them on the
subway, during sports, or in the doctor's office. And I did not
emphasize the unpredictable nature of the improvisation, akin
to dancing on constantly shifting ground, but suggested
instead a steady state of watching the reflexes. Let the
reflexes figure out how to deal with the unpredictable.
This method aimed to reclaim physical possibilities which
may have become dormant, senses we have been trained to
disregard. What would this lead to, really? It sounds very
nice, this reclaiming and opening, but where would these
changes take us? Who would we be?
When we began, in 1972, I went boldly into all this. The
people in the group were young, healthy, and alert. I
assumed that if we didn't consciously focus on problems we
wouldn't create them, and at least such difficulties as
surfaced would not have been projected. As I said carlier,
things seemed simpler then.
It was to be assumed that some of these students would
eventually teach something of what they were doing to
others, and I felt the need to develop this material in such a
way that the students were aware of the teaching mecha-
nisms. It boiled down to making the principles physical,
mental, and cultural-known to them as they learned them.
We had the services of Steve Christiansen and his video
camera and spent hours, when we were not working on the
mat, examining the movement and ourselves, the movers.
This was very useful. Video was, in those days, a new
tool for witnessing the body/mind, and let us see points in
action when we were operative but not conscious. Such
moments, noticed with the help of the videotape or close
observation by a partner, could later be examined in action.
Clues about the nature of the gap might be noticed. We
began to notice where the gaps appeared, at any rate, and
something of their frequency. We also noticed high unfet-
tered moments (and recalled the accompanying feelings).
And we observed fettered duets where reflexive movement
was not to be seen. Sometimes people seemed wary, unable
to let go of conscious control. Disorientation, fear, or fixod
habitual responses would be noticed.
In the working model, events of the emotions and disori-
entations which were felt in conjunction with a gap in
awareness were considered to be symptomatic that the senses
were not quite ready to report what was happening to the
consciousness, that instead they were reporting to the
reflexive part of the mind and body.
I couldn't understand the wary duets. Obviously trust was
missing. With some other partner or on some other day, this
tended to change. All I could do to cope with this mode was
to have partners change regularly. Eventually everyone found
a duet which led them to their reflexes.
When I proposed movement techniques they sometimes
contravened ingrained movement habits: for instance, the
aikido roll, which is a diagonally forward roll that arrived on
our shores from the Orient. At the very attempt at this roll,
students translated it into a somersault, the symmetrical
forward roll we learn in Western movement. This misunder-
standing could persist through any number of repetitions of
examples and attempts and was seriously frustrating to both
the students and me. If they couldn't put their finger on what
was going wrong. I decided, it was perhaps because nothing
in previous movement experience had prepared them for the
movement principles which were developed in the Eastern
martial arts.
These repeated attempts at the aikido roll provided the
first gap I noticed. The act of propelling the body into the
roll is slightly scary, and many people have open eyes before
and after the roll, but in the moment when they are taking
weight on their neck and shoulders, they have their eyes
squeezed shut, and they are not aware that this is so.
I did not solve this two-part problem in time for the first
performance, nor for many years after, though the students
did perfect their somersaults.
I learned that before the body could find the new rolling
pattern it was useful for it to learn the sensations which an
aikido roll creates.
The new sensations, and the parts of the arm, shoulder,
and back where the sensations arise in the roll, could be
explored without committing the whole body to the roll. This
changed the position of the consciousness relative to the
exercise. Instead of an unknown action vs. an habitual
known action which is so similar that it subverts the attempt,
the student has two knowable actions. One is new, tentative,
but understood through the sensorial model. The other is
habitual. Having remedied the first difficulty by establishing
the difference between the two concepts of rolling, the gaps
of consciousness in either could be ferreted out.
These explorations evolved into new technical approaches.
It was noticeable that the approaches require that the student
work with helpful mental attitudes as well as directly with the
physical body. In the aikido roll example above, it was less
helpful to know the pattern mentally and try willfully to do
it than it was to become an observer of the sensations and to
work calmly on each emotional, orientational, or habitual
block as it arose.
The quality of consciousness was coming into focus. It
wasn't all of consciousness and all possible interactions, of
c o u r s e .
A working model for consciousness in this case is
Swiss cheese. We buy it as a lump, and don't attend to the
holes because we don't use them. I was trying to point to the
holes, assuming that if a Swiss cheese could be aware of
itself, then the cheesy part was one sort of consciousness and
the holes were another sort, integral to the shape, the nature
of the whole cheese. We can't take this model much further,
I realize; which may be to the advantage of getting on with
the movement and its interaction with the consciousness.
As we began work on opening up the senses to their
larger potential, it became clear that each of the senses has
images of differing natures. The Swiss cheese above, mostly
a visual image in that I am concentrating on how the cheese
looks, occurred in my brain and was transferred to another
person by my voice, so it was a verbal transmission of a
visual image. What was most needed in our work was
kinetic imagery which was both appropriate to the movement
mode and true (unlike the speculation about the consciousness
of the cheese).
The small movements of standing "still," which formed
the basis of this sort of investigation, are true; they are really
there. But are they images or sensations? If we observed
them, would they filter through the observing mind and affect
the body as images do? Does the nervous system and its
mediation of posture relative to gravity have the possibility
of teaching the consciousness, and does the consciousness
have the property of amplifying or strengthening that media-
tion?
I assumed this reciprocity did exist. I decided that
sensations are what we feel to be happening at the moment,
and they can become images when we take notice that we are
observing them. This suggests that the consciousness can be
aware of itself-a defining characteristic—and that there is a
positive use for this ability to split into self-regard. However,
consciousness doesn't work very well with the unknown, as
was revealed in the aikido roll. It seems to need to know or
to be noticing in order to direct itself and the body. The
attitude of "witnessing" may change this internal control
issue. The search for internal sensations reveals that "I can
feel the small movements." Then our attitude begins to shift
toward, "The body is kept upright by constant reflexive
muscular actions around the skeleton." First we feel the
movements, then we can objectify the feelings into images.
The moment between these perceptions can be as short as a
hyphen. All the above suggests that there is an important
difference between knowing-noticing and noticing-knowing.

These are the sorts of thoughts which came to mind
during the working period from January to June, 1972. Or to
say it in terms of the work: from Magnesium at Oberlin
College through the spring term at Bennington College where
we further identified the premise, the phenomenon, to the
presentation of the work in NYC I called *contact improvisa-
tions." Students from those two institutions (plus members
of the downtown dance community in NYC who "sat in)
were joined by students from the classes of Mary Fulkerson
at the U. of Rochester. The Rochester group was least
familiar with the proposed movement, and as Fulkerson was
teaching them Release Technique via intensive image work,
it was in order to reach these students quickly that the
approach outlined above was developed beyond what had
been necessary at Bennington College.
At Bennington, I had begun by introducing these students
of Western dance to Aikido techniques. However, I soon
abandoned teaching Aikido and started work on specific tools
for the interior techniques. Although physical techniques
could be found for specific movement training, what those
students required was a vision of Eastern martial arts philoso-
phy underlying the techniques (or a viable replacement for
that). This laid the ground for introducing an improvisation
which requires a state of personal involvement and physical
responsibility with/for another person.
It must be pointed out that many of the ideas about
moving which I used existed before this study. The teach-
ings of Release Technique, Aikido, and several other physical
and mental disciplines were influential, and were adjusted
according to my understanding at the time in order to convey
the movement principles of the area of improvisation de-
scribed by the words contact improvisation.
Beyond that, to enable the movement to be accomplished
safely, came physical exercises designed to introduce sensa-
tions that arise during "flying," lifting, and being lifted, and
to physically strengthen the body for these energetic extremes
of the form. Physical strength was seen as the result of
finding the right, i.e., easiest, most efficient inner "pathways."
Stress was discouraged.
We were starting to work on the technical method, a work
which continues today, in an effort to describe what Contact
Improvisation is on its own terms as a phenomenon of duet
movement as well as in the personal terms of a student, who
may for instance have physical strength but spatial weakness,
or improvisational skills but does not trust their weight to
another person.
To summarize: images were used to focus the mind and
then give the mind foci within the sensations of the body.
The words had to be unambiguous, unthreatening, infor-
mative and generally understood.
The statements had to be true, obvious, relevant.
To speak was also to set the tone. I tried to simplify the
issues of the body for transmission to another body. I moved
the mind of my mouth into my body, located issues, and
reported the issues speaking (I assumed) directly to another
body. The student's consciousness was enlisted to manage
attitudes and observe the effect of image on the body, and to
derive from these effects, and others observed within their
bodies, images which could be named and otherwise objecti-
fied and discussed, and fitted into the improvisational
I made a number of assumptions. To study something
like improvisation, which is defined as you go, everything
you assume is going to affect the result. I tried to be aware
of what the assumptions were and to let the phenomenon we
explored, the narrower field of improvisation when commu-
nicating via touch with another person, guide the definitive
imagery into appropriate areas.
This guidance caused us to consider all sorts of things,
such as communication, emotion, psychology, sex, education,
childhood development, culture, taboos, space, time, and the
self. It is al very well to say that one takes responsibility for
one's self in improvisation, but it is indeed a staggering job
in its details. An improvisor's job is never done. Al this to
explore the ability of the consciousness to cleave to the
body's moment and remain there as the moment changes.

for John CAGE

--------------

THE POINT REYES PROJECT

by Cynthia Stevens

Collective research—we gath-
ered to ask and find questions. Ques-
tions about form, performance, compo-
sition, imagination, feelings/states,
improvisation, and dancing.
Nancy Stark Smith was the catalyst
for our group, bringing together Chris
Mathias, Ann Aronov, Ray Chung,
Kirk Andrews, Leigh Hollowell, Sha-
ron Tomsky, Martin Keogh, Julie Oak,
Rochus Schmucker, Ricardo Morri-
son, Stefanos Georgantis and myself to
spend a weekend intensively moving.
speaking, snoozing, feasting, and writ-
ing in a small town near the California
coast known as Point Reyes Station.
This was the home of Nancy's first
contact classes, and it intrigued me
that years later she had returned here
to instigate a new kind of dialogue
about contact. So, as we considered
"the life cycle of a form," it conjured
up images at many levels-form which
lasts seconds or over the course of a
dance, a dancer's life, the life of this
form known as contact.
In a letter, Nancy had laid out
some seeds for the project:
"...wherelhow form originates,
ways to tap into the deepest physical
resources of contact improvisation
while playing with formal consider-
ations at the same time-being aware
of the forms we're generating and
actively working with them. I'd like to
communicate through our dancing
about time, space, form, and feeling
with the same depth and integrity with
which we listen to and move from
touch. weight, support and "the
forces'."
Our stomping ground for the Pro-
ject was the Dance Palace, complete
with an old church space, large new
studio, and resident cow herd. The
presence of our hoofed friends added 
so much visually, aurally, and at times
aromatically, that the bovine perspec-
tive seemed to color our sensibilitics
about the whole weekend.
We arrived on Friday evening to
dance, clarily what the research was
about, and develop structures for the
entire weekend.
That evening. questions for the
group were refined as:
a) Form and formlessness-the life
cycle of a form-how form emerges;
formlessness-the ground from which
form arises?
b) Intuition-the level of awareness
from which choices are made; different
levels of relaxation and choices reflect-
ed in them. What one "sees"-intui-
tive composition.
c) What are we doing with our minds
now that (as experienced contacters)
we're not caught up in safety issues
is our attention still on sensation?
d) Playing with the score that Nancy
has been developing for about a year
and a half", that travels through a pro-
gression of movement/mind states With

an awareness of the arising, developing
and resolving of forms. Letting this
be a ground for comparison to discov-
er the truths that we each move from.
e) Heart-it's role and the experience
of it in dancing.
1) The difference between doing, feel-
ing, and being.
Bathed in the silvery light of an
April full moon, we rolled over to the
bunkhouse at the Point Reyes Youth
Hostel near Limantour Beach. After
settling in, the whole group broke out
in a spontaneous discussion of dance,
metaphysics and linguistics that trailed
into the wee hours.
Saturday we spent the morning in
open dancing and discussion. In the
afternoon we worked with trios, cach
group developing their own focus/
structure, and members of the group
alternating roles as dancer and witness.
We then danced as trios for the entire
group. That evening we prepared a
large Passover Seder and performed
our ritual feast back at the bunkhouse.
Sunday morning, we mapped and
then danced Nancy's score, and "har-
vested" our experiences for a couple of
hours. On Sunday afternoon, we all
created an open space for dancing and
witnessing each other. The witnessing
took place at one end of the studio
which lent a feeling of audience" and
heightened our awareness of formal 

visual considerations as movers.
We chose to have three segments
of dancing: the last focused on inter-
acting with words, speaking both from
the perspectives of watching and/or
moving. It was fascinating to hear in
the moment what different audience
members were attending to.
This process was extended to an
informal "salon" gathering on Tuesday
evening in Ellen Webb's studio in
Oakland, where dancing and dialogue
continued with movers and dance
writers from the Bay Area.

HYPOTHESIS
The structure of the project had a
spaciousness to encompass both our
common questions and individual
curiosities; their coexistence was re-
spectful, the tugs and interconnections
between these layers so enriching.
Some of our individual curiositics
included: Articulating from a disori-
ented state to develop new ways of
speaking: Emotions as contradictions
to the heart; Unity of focus— intuition
as a bridge between the visual and
kinesthetic; intuition in terms of vibra-
tion, rhythm; What conditions make
for an ideal, sublime dance? Can we
create them intentionally?; How struc-
ture offers a form so that one can go
into a state that makes you feel ready
to interact in a more formless opportu-
nity; Inner and outer—what's happen-
ing when you "drop in?"; Rhythms-
interpersonal differences and difficul-
ties arising from these; What attracts
us at different times, what we draw
upon or discard; Effort and non-cf-
fort-the right amount to move you
into a new state, trusting the tension,
going into the unknown; Recovering
and expressing what you know; Grav-
ity as a curvature in space between
two objects; Heart in the larger sense.

//
I felt a deliciousness in skill, control; an
animalness arising from this sense of
power left me wide open, really soaking
in sensation. "I don't know." / thought
so much, "I don't know"—in letting go of
assumptions there was a cracking through
(translating this to interrelationship), how
much I can 'not know'—a sense of liberation

//
Highlights of the project for me included
the chance to work and play within a
community that I've danced with over the
years, but never as a group with a partic-
ular focus, other than a jam. No single
particular event occurred for me that /
could label as an epiphany, but the expe-
rience of the project as a whole has
stayed with me, and served as a catalyst
that continues to inspire, fuel and sustain
my further explorations in movement and
contact improvisation.
I guess if I had to single out one
thing it would be my experience of mov
ing together in a space with many people
and really hearing, seeing. feeling, sens-
ing, that everyone was sensing me, and
that the communication was effortless and
created a ground out of which anything
was possible.

Sharon:
Form. Just a consciousness or intention
seems to start it. Seeing a playful "danc-
ing" cow out the window. I didn't want
to lose my group focus and get distracted.
but I was so captivated and delighted by
this cavorting bovine. A man was mow-
ing the lawn and the cow seemed to be
playing with that activity. Running away.
when the lawn mower came close, move
back closer to it, running away again. It
was so pure it made me laugh and feel
happy. Then the cow was joined gradual.
ly by a whole herd, who seemed to be
doing their own group score. This
caused me to move more energetically in
the room, playing with space and proxim-
ity to a few others.

NSS said: "Lightening up without
losing depth," "Does the weight of your
body pressing into me leave a memory in
my cells?" "Assume connection!"


CHEWING THE CUD
These are reflections, insights and
practices arising from the weekend
which came to us: during the closing
cirele, our Tuesday night talking/danc-
ing salon, and in the ensuing days and
months since the project.
Chris:
Mobility is a key-not only movement, but
energetic and psychic mobility. How do
I/we dip into that state (pool?) where the
personality, imbued with patterns and
habits, does not intervene in a heavy-
handed way but allows our dancing to
unfold and express its true nature?
Rochus:
Isn't it simply natural curiosiry that nat-
rally makes us break habits?
A n m ：
Notes from Tuesday night: easy exchang-
es, enterings and leavings. Noticing my
gaze, feeling the eyes of the watchers,
noticing how that changes my eye focus;
where I look as I am being looked at.
Realization: This dance is happening at
this particular moment, on this particular
evening, with these particular people,
both dancing and watching. Change any
of those elements and it all changes.
Ray:
The residual fallout from the project has
been the formation of one-day labs.
Every so often a group of us gathers to
ask questions and discuss what we're
curious abour and moveldance through
and around these various issues. I espe-
cially enjoyed the one where we danced
with outward visual focus and then with-
out this focus. The change in spatial
perception and interaction was amazing.

S h a r o n :
I waich a bee methodically and slowly
climbing up the window. I wonder why it
doesn't just fly to wherever it is going.
Maybe it doesn't know where it's going.
Is it thinking? Does it have any aware-
ness of following its "inner mandala"?
Does it have a plan? Ahh! It and a big
mosquito hawk quickly descended to the
window sill. A brief duet. Was it attrac-
tion? Coincidence? Flirtation? Graz-
ing? Premeditated contact? The mosqui-
to hawk stays on the window sill. The
bee resumes a methodical and slow climb
up the window. There wasn't much de-
velopment. Or resolution. Maybe they
have a history I don't know about.
The question-what conditions increase
the possibility of an epiphany, one that
changes you forever? These conditions
might help if the moon is right?
• Having enough room
• Dancing with someone you know
very well or someone you have just met
• Dancing with a partner whose
presence allows you to unravel your
impuise a fraction of a second longer
before you need to save yourself?
* A fluid sense of self
_fil in the blank.
Julie:
I'm not sure I had any full-blown epiphs
at the weekend but / definitely did have
one while "chewing the cud" in the fol-
lowing days: For several of the gorgeous
sunny San Francisco mornings which
followed that weekend, I treated myself to
some movement time in Golden Gae
While starting with Nancy's beau-
tifully basic suggestion, lying on the floor
(grass) and giving my weight over to
gravity, I experienced a terrific feeling. /
felt as if gravity was pouring through me,
like it was a molten fluid force, and I was
a vessel through which it poured into the
earth. I felt flooded with a sense of the
continuum of existence. "Oh my God," I
thought. "gravity FLOWS! Hmm..maybe
that's because time flows?"
I shared my excitement abour all of
this with my Contact class.
anyone tell me that time doesn't exist." 1
said, "I can feel the flow."
"Don't worry, Julie." said one stu-
dent, *I totally support you in having this
epiphany." (I hadn't mentioned the
The weekend was a great inspiration
Cindy:
I am being created in the practice of this
attention, this form. Unity-this is where
a thousand potentials exist and I intuitive-
ly follow one. The project excited me,
spiralled up awareness, freedom, nourish-
ment and fire. I felt so at home in the
community which was not tied to geogra-
phy, but commitment to discovery within
a form. I realized at a new level how
important it is to have community, which
helps me to reinvest in my passion for
moving. This support is fundamental to
flying our collective body of understand-
ing and expression.


-------------

CONTACT IN INSTITUTIONS Another View

by Ann Cooper Albright

With the exception of one and a
half years (during which I had fel-
lowships to fund various writing
projects), I have spent the last fifteen
years of my life either studying or
teaching in academic institutions. 1
have been involved with Contact
Improvisation both inside and outside
of these various institutions for
welve of those years. What follows
are some thoughts about my experi-
ence teaching Contact Improvisation
at Oberlin College which were occa-
sioned by last semester's class, Aat
Hougée's essay, "Paths of Change:
notes on contact improvisation in an
institutional setting." (and Steve
Paxton's response) in the Summer!
Fall '92 issue of Contact Quarterly,
and a timely call from Nancy Stark
Smith. [A.C.A.]


I teach Contact Improvisation
in the Theater and Dance program of
Oberlin College, a small liberal arts
institution in the midwest. Walking
into Warner Center last spring to
begin the first class, I was over-
whelmed by a sense of the history of
this institution and Contact. Twenty
years ago in that very space, Steve
Paxton came to give a movement
workshop, performed Magnesium,
and met Nancy Stark Smith, then a
student majoring in dance and cre-
ative writing. Every time I teach this
course I show my class videos of
Contact Improvisation, including the
1972 tape of Magnesium, so that they
begin the course with a sense of the
history of the dance form as well as
Oberlin's position within that history.
Unfortunately, during the seventeen
years before I was hired, Contact was
taught only infrequently by visiting
dance artists and interested students
(who learned the form in workshops
and then came back to "pass it on").
I am the first person with a continu-
ing position (i.c., tenure-track facul-
ty) to offer Contact Improvisation as
a regular part of the dance curricu-
lum. Contact Improvisation, at last
for the time being, has been "institu-
tionalized™ at Oberlin College.
Allow me to immediately confront
the often negative connotations of
that term and assert that I'm not at
all convinced (as Aat Hougée seems
to be) that situating Contact within a
school curriculum is a negative thing.
Quite the contrary. Rather than
closing down the improvisatory focus
and anarchic quality of the dancing
in order to institutionalize (in the
sense of "standardize") the form, I
believe that the liaison between Con-
tact Improvisation and institutions.
while potentially dangerous, can also
challenge the form of Contact Impro-
visation on one hand and extend the
possibilities of teaching in an institu-
tion of higher learning on the other.
My Contact class meets for two
hours three times a week and we also
have a regular Sunday jam. The
academic semester lasts for an aver-
age of four months. This gives the
class a wonderfully luxurious amount
of time to work. During that time
we live intimately with the physical
form and it is rewarding to see my
students' bodies develop, and their
minds begin to adapt to this close-
ness. I like to see how people's
ideas and relationships to the form
evolve over four months; how they
continually find ways to break
through patterns which last week
seemed so new and exhilarating, but
which quickly become established as
habits. I am also interested in work-
ing through the initial amazement
with the dancing, past the inevitably
frustrating plateaus, and into new
connections with the form.
This kind of continuity differs radi-
cally from the usual workshop format
of much current Contact teaching.
When I have participated in intensive
workshops like A Cappella Motion or
retreats like the Breitenbush Jam, I
have often been struck by the surreal
quality of the experience. People put
their daily lives on hold to go off and
have a "contact experience," often
expecting to have some sort of per-
sonal revelation or dancing epiphany.
That kind of heavily charged emo-
tional atmosphere can be exhilarating
for a while but seems hard to sustain
and eventually becomes limiting.
Because a semester-length class
forces us to work through this inten-
sity and on and on, each person in
the class shifts through a variety of
expectations about what the form can
offer them emotionally, physically,
socially, and institutionally. Our
discussions at the end of every class
mark these shifts of consciousness
and it is exciting to see the class
become aware of the different dimen-
sions of their dancing engagements.
In addition, having a semester
gives me a structure (yes-complete
with syllabus and grades) in which to
ask my students to learn about Con-
tact Improvisation in a variety of
ways. Now that Cynthia Novack's
book Sharing the Dance is available
in paperback, I have made it-as
well as selected issues of CQ-re-
quired reading. Occasionally, we
watch videos which follow the evolu-
tion of Contact and look at its impact
on other forms of contemporary
dance performance and improvisa-
tion. The students are also asked to
keep a journal of their thoughts and
experiences. Contrary to what one
might expect, I have found that this
academic frame does not take the
spontaneity, physicality, or joy out of
our dancing experiences. Under-
standing the form historically and
intellectually can, in fact, deeply
enrich the dancing. I believe that
Contact is a way of thinking as well
as moving. Learning the skills and
having the experience of improvising
on both these levels of consciousness
is incredibly enriching and makes me
more and more curious about ways to
combine physical and mental danc-
Oberlin is a liberal arts college, not
a dance conservatory, and my stu-
dents come into the class with won-
derfully diverse sets of interests and
backgrounds. Biology students, jazz.
musicians, women's studies majors,
even a philosopher or two, al take
the class, and this range of experienc-
es is reflected in our discussions and
in the student journals. Although
this means that I can rarely teach an
"advanced" Contact class, it also
means that my own ideas about Con-
tact, my own belief about what Con-
tact is, are constantly challenged by
other people's perceptions and expec-
tations.
Teaching Contact in this setting
forces me to address certain institu-
tional issues such as power and di-
versity. I like trying to develop new
ways to make Contact relevant in the
1990s. For instance, I have begun to
facilitate workshops within Women's
Studies conferences in which I use
Contact exercises to provide a physi-
cal experience from which to talk
about the issues of location, margin-
ality, and centrality that are currently
so problematic for feminist theory.
Recently, I have also been playing
with the idea of setting up affinity or
interest groups within the class based
on a physical and intellectual explo-
ration of issues such as gender and
sexuality, multiculturalism, body
image, etc. Every time I think to
myself that I am going too far, pull-
ing Contact Improvisation out of its
appropriate context, I pick up an
issue of Contact Quarterly and real-
ize that I am not alone; that other
people are also stretching the form,
pulling at its improvisational poten-
tial to make it meaningful in other
Teaching Contact in an academic
institution has in no way co-opted the
radical potential of the form. This is
absolutely clear to me each time we
dance outside on a nice spring day
and the Deans, Provosts, and assorted
suited administrators walk by as I am
rolling on the grass with a student or
two. As an improvisatory form in
which relationships, movements, and
social situations are all open to nego-
tiation and invention, Contact refuses
the traditional student-teacher para-
digm and stretches the seams of the
institutional context. I can't teach
Contact from behind a desk and I
can't keep an "appropriate" distance
from my students. Even though I
ultimately guide them and grade
them in this course, that reality is
usually suspended as we al lie down
and sink our weight into the floor to
begin class.
From the very first class, I try to
open a space in which the students
are encouraged to move on their own
and think for themselves. The class
exercises don't ask that they follow
me or try to look like me, but rather
that they feel their weight, the floor,
and the contact point for themselves.
In the framework of an academic
institution, this approach is disorient-
ing both for the students and for
myself. But this very willingness to
be disoriented is an integral part of
the training and a challenge of the
form.
To teach Contact Improvisation in
an academic institution is to engage
with one of the most radical forms of
pedagogy. Besides the open, dialogic
class dynamic, there is the whole
issue of physical contact. Even the
most liberal-minded of my colleagues
can't believe I actually touch my
students, let alone roll on the floor
with them. Understanding the differ-
ence helps me realize why I am so
committed to this form of dancing.
For me, Contact Improvisation is not
just another movement technique, it
informs my thinking, my teaching, as
well as my identity within the aca-
demic institution


-----------------

Editor note 1993

by Nancy 

WHAT GOES UP

Dear Lisa,
Sunday night, Easter, 10:15 p.m.
I started reading Movement Research’s
latest Performance Journal (#6),
about “heros and histories,” in which a
long list of authors/dancers write about
someone or something that has influenced
or inspired them. Got to thinking
about what inspiration feels like to me:
how it feels like spring, how it gives
rise to action, and how it is contagious.
I got more and more excited as I
continued to flip through the journal,
reading bits here and there, and I soon
found myself writing madly and noticing
that I was being inspired at even the
thought of the others’ inspirations. I
was buzzing, my pen sailing across the
lined white page, fighting the paper’s
friction, thumb and fingers squeezing
hard to hang onto the pen as it flew
across the paper. Forearm tightening,
needing a breath, I felt myself finally let
go and slow down. Period. Pause.
Period. Space. I’ve been obsessed
of late with endings. With the period
And the space after the period Watching
for the endings of things: Sentences.
Trains of thought. Conversations.
Phrases of movement. Phases of life.
Dances. The power of the end to lend
shape, substance, and meaning to what
came before. And will come after.
Inspiration connected to expiration.
Breathing in and breathing out
In Contact Improvisation, I learned
through momentum how movement
continues and can keep going almost
indefinitely, as the senses do and energy
does and one thing leads to the next,
and there is always something going on,
even in stillness there is something and
once one can “navigate through spherical
space” with relative abandon there
are fewer and fewer safety reasons to
break your flow. To stop moving. To
stop.
The end of Contact Improvisation
dances, especially in the frequently-used
round-robin form, often comes only
because someone else replaces you,
takes your partner, and you’re out. No
period No space. Just an ongoing
flow of activity. Momentum, both
physical and mental, has always inspired
me, but now I’m stopping to look for
the definition of forms inside the flow.
The flip side of the momentum
mode is another form I’ve experienced
in Contact where, in an attempt to keep
myself and my partner ready for the
unexpected, I learned to disengage from
any beginning-to-be-predictable material.
But this way of resolving/ending/
changing elements within the dancing
became just as predictable. Material
still never really resolved or ended, it
just came to consciousness and was let
go of, leaving an “empty” moment in
which the next sensation would arise
and a new phrase begin.
Lately I’ve become curious about
lingering in rather than disengaging
from identifiable patterns that arise in
my improvised dancing, both alone and
with a partner, whether it is a particular
quality of touch, an inner image, or the
rhythm of a weight exchange, like the
slow and granular shift of weight into a
supporting limb. Lingering seems to be
a way for me to follow a natural forming
without arbitrarily staying with
things too long or dropping them prematurely.
Throughout writing this, I’ve been
having continual thoughts about our
being in a time full of injury, illness,
disillusionment, fear, and rage. And
scarcity. And how there’s a need, and
even desire, to enter the shadow, to feel
and move through the dark waters.
Maybe this is the other side of the euphoric
love-and-light phase of the ’60s
and ’70s that many of us were inspired
by. We seem to need our other half.
Dark side of the moon. Which makes
inspiration all the more penetrating.
Not so much to be inspiring, but to be
inspirable. To be ready and willing to
be moved
Love,
Nancy

--------------------

Out In The Field
A report on making a dance in Czechoslovakia 

by Pauline de Groot


In the month of May, 1992, I
made a piece for A Dato Dance Group
in Bratislava, Slovakia. I had met
Marta Polakova, the leader of the small
company, the previous summer in my
class at the Internationale Tanzwochen,
Vienna and she asked me if I would
want to come and make a piece with her
group. I liked the idea, especially to
work with trained dancers, but I had
little idea if such a project could be
realized.
Later in the year, Josef Vlk, the
leader of the theatre group of A Dato,
came to Amsterdam to fill me in on
their progress. I learned that there
would be no money to speak of, but
there would be housing, enough allowance
for food, eager interest, and performance
facilities. Since I did not know
the dancers I suggested they send me a
video of them improvising together.
This was a help. It it was not easy to
decide to go away as the season had
already been full for me. Finally, of
course, I decided that to make new
work on these particular dancers, in
Slovakia, would be a unique experience
and a worthy challenge.
Once there, I found the working
climate to be vigorous, efficient and
healthy. Each morning, I would lead a
warm-up for the three women of the
company, joined by former company
members and other local dancers, in
total about 6 people. After a short
break, I would work with the three
women, choreographing, rehearsing until
around 4 pm, when they had to leave
for teaching jobs.
The idea of letting the body settle
into sensation and listen to what occurs
with a different awareness, ‘doing nothing’,
was rather a new experience for
these dancers. At first this could make
them giggly and distracted as though
they were ‘not working’. Improvisations
would be tackled with a vengeance
and instructions filled in almost before
they were formulated. But in the course
of a month, aided by their eagerness for
learning, new ideas began to take root.
This opened them to the value of taking
their time and really seeing each other,
rather than projecting themselves out to
an imagined audience. These were
exciting developments.
The dancers were very good at, and
‘used to’, being shown movement and
reproducing it, spending a good deal of
time on details. This stimulated me into
making and teaching them more of my
own movement, as it was emerging.
The piece, named Tangent, was made
from selections of my phrases, solo
phrases made by the dancers, group
tasks and improvisations.
My original thought for the music
had been to mix the sound of the frogs’
singing near Devin Castle, where the
dancers and I visited one Sunday afternoon,
with the voice of the castle guide
telling the visitors, in an on-going
stream of Slovak, of the hundreds and
thousands of years of peoples’ passing,
combatting and defending the place. I
thought it would make an interesting
combination of sound materials for an
edit; authentically ‘tangential’. But
when Joself Vlk, the musical director of
the group, returned with a tape recorder,
the frogs were silent and the “guide”
turned out to have been a knowledgeable
stranger. Since the time was limited
we went back to our own resources
and this worked out quite well. Josef
made the music on his synthesizer, live
during the performance, from samples
that we had selected and structured.
In classes and rehearsals I spoke
English, but only one of the dancers
understood the gist of it, which made
translation necessary, sometimes taking
a lot of time, for they are not used to
translating for visitors.
The dancers took turns showing me
around to the shops, post office, etc. but
to find my way for buying food or
clothing was still an interesting learning
process. I became aware of how conditioned
I am as a westerner, e.g. I would
go to a vegetable shop or supermarket
all set up to buy some carrots, only to
find green peppers. Or I’d spot oranges
one day and go back the next day to
find only cabbage and potatoes. But I
soon learned that there is always something
to eat and that you buy what there
is or you eat nothing. Many articles
like coffee, shoes, etc., are often only
available on one day and not on the
next, which explains the long lines
around the block on some days.
We worked in the studio Mondays
through Saturdays and on Sunday we
would rest and need it! Or go out for a
trip, or a walk. One evening I saw the
Opera in the National Theatre, conspicuously
attended by many ‘rich’ Austrians
from Vienna. In the same theatre I saw
a final performance of the Ballet Academy.
Both events were interesting
enough but difficult for me to sit
through. I enjoyed a performance of a
Slovak Folkdance and Music Ensemble,
in the more dreary outskirts of Bratislava.
This is obviously a popular entertainment,
as well as a lucrative form of
dance for young male and female dancers.
The A Dato dancers looked upon
this with sadness. They see the existence
of many well-funded folkdance
groups as a major reason for the difficulty
to keep men interested in the less
remunerative field of ‘new dance’.
On the last three days of my stay,
the premiere performances of Tangent
were held in the Puppet Theatre of
Bratislava, a cute little stage just large
enough. The costumes were designed
and made at the last minute, with amazing
care and little costs. An excellent
light and sound crew, all in the family,
set up the space in simple collaboration.
There was a lot of laughing and surprisingly
little stress. On the same program,
the dancers performed a piece by
Marta Polakova, Catch the Fall.
In the performance, the dancers
moved with abandon, now and then
hurried, but also taking new decisions
when possible! I was not unpleased,
and the small audience seemed to be
very receptive. But it was strange for
me to see the piece up on this little
platform stage. I felt that it would look
better in a larger space, with the audience
up higher than the dance floor.
But certainly in Slovakia the company
will have to take what is available.
I was in the air back to Amsterdam
during their last performance in the
Puppet Theatre. Tangent is now being
performed as part of A Dato’s 1992-
1993 repertory. ★


--------------

ERASING - Reflections on the 1992 PRO SERIES

by Many

INTRODUCTION

The following writing is excerpted from the research
material generated by Christina Svane for the PRO SERIES
'92. Applying the four lenses of: instruction, atmosphere,
teaching, what is learned—technique, I culled these lines
and paragraphs from Christina's forty-page portrait/report
of the series.
The PRO SERIES is a workshop program in Vienna,
Austria designed for young professional dancers. It was
started by the Internationale Tanzwochen Wien [International
Danceweeks Vienna] in 1990. In and behind this project
are board members Suzanne Linke of Germany, Karine
Saporta of France and myself, along with Ismael Ivo, artistic
director, and Karl Regensburger, financial director of the
Tanzwochen.
For the 1992 PRO SERIES, we created a focus of research
and exchange into cross-technical and -aesthetic training for
dance. One of the main goals of the program was to record
the specific worlds, physical and mental processes, and
classroom atmospheres created by four invited artists from
widely varied backgrounds, as the beginning of an investigation
into the possibilities of information exchange. The
hope is that by opening the doors into the houses that each
artist has carefully created out of and for their dance discoveries
and philosophies, we will begin to see these worlds
merge into a new technical understanding of dance.
The program's structure was set up to facilitate an information
flow. Between each workshop, we scheduled coteaching
days which allowed the teachers and students to
study in a completely different form We invited Christina
Svane to act as a catalyst and scribe in the project, teaching
her own writing process in each workshop, interviewing,
recording the teachers' work in the classroom, and giving
feedback. It was like having a microphone/video camera/mirror
attached to your otherwise solo teaching existence.
Christina's skilled and educated enthusiasm was the
yeast in this bakery of mixed ingredients.
I had no idea what to expect from the participants, especially
the teachers. I think they had no idea themselves
what their response would be to this experiment. I was
deeply moved by the way each teacher and Christina joined
this cross-pollination process. They seemed to share with
me a curiosity about what could happen to the body and
the art if the vocabularies, references, and specific worlds
were opened, letting fears and prejudices melt away in the
warmth of creative curiosity. They seemed to trust that
their own creative path would be able to encompass the
flood of new information. It was great to see the students
follow, sometimes with unbelieving eyes, as their teachers
worked across their own borders into each other's dance
worlds where there has been a great deal of prejudice in the
past.
I was also very pleased to see the response of the workshop
participants, which at times threatened to get out of
hand when their enthusiasm led them to ask for an entire
re-scheduling of the program to enable them to take several
workshops at once. Learning is a wonderful hunger. I am
sometimes shocked at how much of the time it is suppressed.
What follows are four capsules of the teaching processes
of artists Mark Tompkins (Paris), Saburo Teshigawara (Tokyo),
Yoshiko Chuma (New York), and Carlos Orta (Cara-
cas/New York) and a poem It is interesting to me to see
how completely each teacher's world is created and how
Christina captures the subtle process of their teaching. Her
writing seems to vibrate like a drumskin in many directions
and many frequencies at once.
In these pages I see deep references to learning about
things that you find no education for elsewhere in our cultures.
I see teaching processes that are empassioned with
real living interest. I see a spread of vastly different learning
atmospheres carefully and considerately constructed. I
see languages used to create freedom and intense self-reliance
and creativity. I see processes being taught with assurance
which show how to focus attention to a precision
without leaving the motivation behind. I see ways in which
dance has developed a whole system to sustain and develop
the individual and bring him/her fully and adventurously
into the human social network. I see an art form which has
found the keys to sustain exploration and discovery. I see
art manifesting itself as a high social tool, an expression of
its rightful power, coming from our bodies, minds, and
spirits. This is for me the history of dance and the manifestation
of excellence in its traditions, seen now in the 1990s.

--------------

Meeting in Vienna

by Christina Svane

from the first moment nervously crossing the green sport-hall
grass, just arriving from amsterdam via four endless hours
in the frankfurt intergalacdc jet lounge
for the temporarily homeless sleeping on chairs with my child
and seeing a small circle of dancers under a tree
gathered around my old friend mary overlie
she exhausted, excited to get acquainted
like a mother with her newborn, this festival
had the signs of something missing like a wall
that institutions need to put doors in
so they can charge you to walk through it
something missing like the sides of the swimming pool
in the gymnasium, when my turn at the microphone came
like a step off a cliff i did what i always do in my dreams:
gel the magnetic haze of my wishes into a buoyant belief
like a cloud with a smile and a skin...breathe in and fly
i remember surprise at the ease of my take-off, no crash
to stop me, so on up i went, saying i believe dancers
can rescue the world by revealing the multi-dimensional nature
of reality, observed in our laboratory of being: ourselves
and re-fitting language to the shape of experience, writing
not lines but a sense of connection through space, being true
reporters from outposts of awareness, the very same stuff
we’ve been trained to discover, and now must empower
ourselves and each other to stand for: the freedom to know
our true nature, no matter how strange or ecstatic it sounds
for no other ait is as fertile a field, no other artist as
ripe to be picked to try to reveal what “I am” feels like
and if there ever was a time when humanity needed to find
a go-between to communicate with the earth again, that time
is now, and dance could be, as it used to be, an offering
of oneself as a channel for the earth to ‘speak’ through
and each teacher spoke, as clear as poets, crazy poets
and i knew we were here to receive empowerments just as much
as to give them, and ismael’s eyes shone like the stars
you follow to find the north star, he would lead us
by telling us then, and again, this is your chance to do
what your heart longs to do, something you never dared
and his slow beautiful speech and his long powerful strides
stirred the air like an eagle on a mission from the gods

this man brought the mountain with him, and the jungle
and the cliff i’d stepped off of: learning to fly was his
stock in trade, his own faith was so strong it could carry you
halfway to wherever you were afraid to go. then it’s yours.*
i never saw him dance, but just walking i could see the glow
of sacred traditions behind him, the wild wind in his sails
his kind of power i don’t get a chance to meet very often
right there was a beauty in the pro series: the chance to meet
and there were the walls that were wonderfully missing:
dividing the ethnic, modem, and postmodern dance, a relief
like a family united after a long unnecessary misunderstanding
with notes to compare and experiences to share
mark tompkins brought the fine art of play, finding the edge
of your balance, the risk, the dance of your vision, chasing
yourself, contact improvisation in mornings and video improvisations
in afternoons, bonded by touch, team-work and delight
yoshiko chuma trained her group as soloists, to think fast,
identify the way they make choices, catch themselves at their
habits, practice instant construction, like building bridges
in war, with no time to waste...she says, “100%. no excuses”
carlos orta arrived with pythagoras, hermes, and Salvador dali.
sweat initiations in the temple gymnasium: rhythm, vibration,
compression into form, following motive into movement, finding
the love in the leap, noble, naive, always eager for the new.
saburo teshigawara is ultimate improvisor, even in his speech,
more silence than words, his essential approach, to be guided
by the moment, trance level of profound, fluid expression he
elicits through simple image of stream, air is a being, true.
mary overlie provided power of expectation for four choreographers
to make choreography, also passionate commitment to
her role as mentor, possibility of actually helping artists,
her ubiquitous presence like crazy genius, (one could almost
hear her muttering “it’s working! the time machine is almost
perfected!”), distributed priceless permission to go beyond
one’s limits, compassion for every individual, deep and clear,
earth must have called her to initiate such a gathering.
i give paper and pens and say go outside
and listen for the voice of the earth, don’t fear cliches,
or we roll to the edge of sleep, and dictate to a partner/scribe.
be earth’s oracle, perform your text, with chorus, dancing echo in
spontaneous ritual, my function to focus collective intent,
give it voice and witness the power of people moving themselves
by the innocence of their own attempts to give word to what
they hear, a nothing moment, but when told, the world was in it.

-------------------



THE PRO SERIES: An Overview through Interview

THE PRO SERIES 92 was a manifestation of a community
of dance-makers. Community. Communicating. Manifesting.
Dancing. It functioned as a lens both inward and outward:
microscope, telescope. What is the relationship of the
individual to his/her art? What is the relationship of this art
to the world? Overview and interview. Discovering the
common features of our work among dancers from all parts of
the world and all parts of the field. What "cross-pollination"
might occur by bringing together postmodern, modern, ballet,
theater, and spiritual dance traditions, represented in the
backgrounds of the participants and workshop leaders? To my
eyes as observer, participant, and writing leader, this crosspollination
produced new dimensions of reflection. Like adding
a few facets to a diamond. The diamond of awareness of
our sources of inspiration. [C.S.]


instruction
Mark's voice is bare-bones, matter-of-fact as he instructs the
dancers to manipulate the passive weight of their partner.
"Two things: Explore structure...warm up. It is not a massage.
The important thing is you don't have to be systematic.
But be curious. You can get involved visually, or
through sensation, and you can get fascinated by a detail.
You can also explore what happens to your structure as you
accommodate your curiosity."
atmosphere
He starts these instructions without any other preliminaries.
No greetings or gatherings. This creates immediately a
sense of just do it, in the group. The room takes on the
clear, dispassionate atmosphere of observation. The Laboratory.
Facts of perception. His manner, like his voice, like
his body, emanates a tone of relaxed, almost blase cool.
teaching approach
Mark demonstrates with his assistant, Willi Domer, each
time he gives a new instruction. These demonstrations are
generous, long enough to let us see him dancing. He teaches
with his body, not his words. His body is not rushing
through anything. It is not using shorthand. This anchors
us in where we are. And empowers us to resist the temptation
to abandon the steady focus we had built up—the
temptation to throw it away and go running after some
excitement. He and Willi hold the focus steady, like Sherlock
Holmes and Dr. Watson holding a magnifying glass
steady over an important set of clues.

As people stream across the gymnasium floor, swiveling
and reswiveling their heads to keep their gaze opposed, as
he asks, to their shifting path, he adds the idea of improvising
with the rhythmic independence of head from feet—not
shifting always together. When that is achieved, he frees
their feet from a steady pulse. Next to be taken away is a
steady direction across the floor. After that, one's weight is
kept in a state of falling and the feet changing direction to
catch it. "Ride your own personal roller coaster," he calls to
them.
what is learned—technique
He is pulling the rug out from under them, over and over.
He is proving to them the independence of their parts, and
the mind of those parts. And that whatever is the constant
factor in what they are doing can become an inconstant
factor, and they can still ride. Their dancing is not dependent
on any constant factors.

This is the essence of the empowerment I saw coming from
Mark's work. The permission to acknowledge that maybe
you're interested in something else now. And that now is
constandy shifting. Working in this friendly fashion with
oneself—daring to take risks, but not denying where one's
focus is at any moment—makes one's energy and imagination
continuously available for action. Out of which great
art may arise, as a bonus. And in the meantime, the experiences
are fascinating.
What is remarkable in the teaching style he has developed,
is how contiguous the bodies of material are, one thing
flowing smoothly into the next. So that in the course of a
single afternoon, a group warms up with technique, develops
physical improvisation skills, and is initiated into the
perceptual maze of framing, composing and tracking one's
focus—skills which they soon have under their perceptual
belts.
At the showing finishing the PRO SERIES, the video tapes
that they produce from the class knock us all out, dazzled
by the energy captured through super-subjectivity, and the
clarity of its intent.


SABURO TESHIGAWARA
Dance of Air / Breaking Down Forms 


instruction

"Our body, normally, is object. Objects are in time. But in
dance, our body is in movement, and we try to think about
quality. Quality is outside time. Rhythm is an object."
"How do we connect with others? I think about quality."
"They are breathing. That will be developed to feel
'stream'. If I may say, if you have clear vision in and out,
you will get some stream. Inside of your body and outside
of your body and on your skin."

teaching approach

"I usually say, 'Don't think about figure'. And also, it's not
a result. They are checking their stream. They want to
make stream and feel it. And after, stream makes you
move. From inside and outside. So our class usually begins
like this


atmosphere
Through images of air streams, he leads them into states of
clarity, surrender. With a single, occasional word, he guides
them to focus on the stream as line, or as seed. He suggests
the stream is now moving them from outside. He suggests
a meeting of the outer and inner stream.
"Usually I subtly suggest that stream will be line. What is
line, that is the question."
The dancers immediately respond to this image (when it is
given in class) with a heightened degree of directional
clarity. The speed of the group's transformation is stunning
and the audience is momentarily baffled, as if asking ourselves,
"Did I just see what I think I saw?"
The authenticity of what we witnessed put to rest, at least
for me, any worries about the hypnogogic method he used.
He was using it to lead people beyond their limitations. He
was empowering them.
Later, after another similar exercise, Saburo calls their names
one by one, and they stand up, fresh and smiling when then-
name sounds. The demonstration is over.


what is learned—technique
What I see while observing this process—in which every
dancer has left themselves behind and stepped into the
dimension of an elemental quality—are acolytes, initiates in
a ceremony of empowerment. Because they are not working
on a style, they are gaining knowledge through direct experience
of the natural world. With a few words he opens the
door and invites them outside the world of constructed
concepts.


CARLOS ORTA

Imagery and Vision
There is Carlos on a chair, his back to the mirror, near a
grand piano.

instruction
Several dancers are working on their own. Intensely concentrating
on imaginary partners, they are embracing, struggling
with, lifting these partners, who turn out to be tuna
fish (from Salvador Dali's "Tuna Fishing") they are killing.
There is an atmosphere of great dignity in the studio. A
dance is being made here. We are in the temple of its inception.

atmosphere
As a teacher bringing with him his domain, Carlos has
moved in like a king with an invisible entourage. Weeks
later, in an interview, I discover who some of those invisibl
figures—advisors, emissaries, ambassadors from other
worlds—are. From all of his words and gestures glows a
light of sacred tradition. Familiar and foreign. It offers
reassurance, but also demands a sacrifice. It is an energy
that asks, "Are you willing to go further?"
teaching approach
When he listens he leans forward, investing his energy in
the speaker. He emanates his appreciation through his
posture, charging the air and us with an elegant, relaxed
intensity. Direct transmission. This is what is going on
here. Transmission of an attitude that dance is a noble
quest.
I watched amazed at their trust in his instructions. It is
something I ask him about later: What empowers him to
win their trust on these journeys? I find out it is his own
quest. These are not just words. They are experiences he
has had over and over. Technique.
All faces start shining as they do the exercise, empowering
their hands. "Now you could cure someone!" he says at thf
end. Believable, feelable, this awakening of energy.
what is learned—technique
Energy. Where does it come from? When it fills us, where
does it take us? I get the impression that for Carlos, this
has been a question—a quest—leading him through dance
worlds in European capitals to a shaman's hut on the Amazon
River to Hindu temples and Greek ruins. It is his devotion
to that mystery that empowers him In every movement
the dancers make, he sees that mystery manifest. Or
muzzled.
(He has just given two men in the group an instruction.)
The piano player is inspired and accompanies them, playing,
as jazz critic Whitney Balliet once wrote, "in the silver
forest of the upper register." The music and Carlos's words
have a revelatory effect on the men, as they cross the vast
space, dancing—really dancing—for the first time. I am
relieved to notice that I am not the only person watching
who has tears in their eyes.


YOSHIKO CHUMA
Shifting Concepts
It is the second day. She asks everyone to take the spot in
the room they had yesterday. "It has become like your
territory." Once everyone is in place, ready to move, Yoshi-
ko begins teachings
instruction
Throughout Yoshiko's classes: personal anecdotes and opinions
are given equal value to her movement ideas. It seems
like a secret method of transmitting a particular kind of
strength. Maybe it's something she learned through hard
knocks and she wants to save them the grief: personal
power requires a personalized context. If you feel like an
outsider, you can't be nourished by the field. Inside information—gossip,
shop talk, stories full of famous dancers
nourishes you like real grapes from a real grapevine. Yoshi-
ko always uses this kind of talk in her teaching, as if learning
to sound like a choreographer is half the battle to becoming
a choreographer. And indeed it seems to function
like a puberty initiation, turning dance students into dancers,
or dancers into 'performers'. It's a change in attitude.
Was it Goethe who said you cannot help but be great, once
you feel at home?
Up and down. Now she asks them to improvise between
the ups and down.
She claps her hands to start and stop the dancers—a stimulus
like a drumbeat, or a crack of a whip. "If you are in
bed, you'd never get up like that! Find more natural
ways... I see people on stage, they get up like this and I get
no statement. All I see is they are working very hard. So
your existence in the space is important, so do it more
easily."
"Look, don't worry about if it looks good. But if you can,
get it kinematically right. Kinematic means how the physics
are working, the best way. So it's not about being decorative.
If it's kinematically right, it will look right. Okay, you
have twenty minutes."
atmosphere
Once again, the dancers—still in their own "territories"—
begin. The room—a vast gymnasium—is filled with movement
circulating like ten spoons stirring ten pots. I feel like
we are in the kitchen where the paramecium flagellate
through plasma, and the snowflakes form and melt: The
renewal pot—salt and spirals and sperm and springs.
teaching approach
"Today we focus on your movement. Then shift out of that
movement. I'm not going to say anything but one word:
SHIFT. Can you shift that movement that you made."
"Think about it."
"See, I'm tricking you. Because for almost everybody, I see
a lot more of you in your shifts." She addresses each of
them with a few words summing up her impression of them
as movers, so far.
A large part of her method as a teacher is her highly developed
skill in reading each of her students' qualities from the
moment she meets them
20 Contact Quarterly
what is learned—technique
When the concept of SHIFT is introduced, people are baffled
and bombard her with questions. A German translation is
asked. A Japanese. She is careful not to give any further
definition.
"No questions! Each of you will have a different understanding.
That's the point."
This is where things start to shift in a student: being led to a
position where they are disoriented, then push to go on,
make decisions. For the entire three weeks to come, this
moment—withholding explanation while demanding interpretation—will
remain for me the bright gem of Yoshiko's
teaching.
She has made it her business as a choreographer to recognize
and use people's personal styles. This kind of eagle-
eyes seeing fuels her teaching as well, and is transmitted to
the students with an underlying sense of the value of their
individuality—the choices they make that she would not
have.
Yoshiko sees the potential of each one, and sees it fiercely.
It is a question of how quickly one can see in oneself what
she sees in you, and come forward with one's hidden information
to work with her.
She is not comfortable with the notion of herself as a teacher
in a classical sense. But she empowers dancers by immers-
ing them in the high-voltage atmosphere of her own readiness
to recognize original thinking in movement.


--------------

MARTIAL DANCE the development of a form Interview with Hillel Krauss

by Lisa Nelson

HILLEL KRAUSS is an improvisor,
choreographer, martial artist and
the originator of Martial Dance, a
form he began in 1982 that synthesizes
Contact Improvisation and martial
arts. Hillel learned to play European-
style soccer and began practicing Tai
Kwon Do Karate, both at an early
age. He was first introduced to Contact
Improvisation at Bennington College
where he received a BA. in
dance. In 1981 he co-founded
“Waves,” the first Contact Improvisation
company in Israel. Hillel has
been practicing Tai Chi Chuan for 17
years which he teaches in Toronto,
Canada. He is currently teaching
workshops and classes in Martial
Dance in the U.S., Canada, Israel and
Europe.
This interview took place in August
1992, after a ten year period of development
of a form I have called Martial
Dance. Martial Dance is a study
of the self and an exploration of relationship
through a movement interaction.
As the form continues to evolve
it reveals itself more and more to be
about the language of movement and
the ability to communicate clearly,
articulately, and effectively in a movement
interaction. [H.K.]

Foundation

Lisa Nelson: Hillel, what were the
beginnings of Martial Dance?

Hillel Krauss: Early on, when I was
developing the Martial Dance (MD), I
was intrigued by two questions—how
to begin, and what is the nature of the
interaction? I struggled for years with
what seemed to be something that
should have been right in front of me.
What I came to understand was that
rather than “how do you begin?” or
“what is the meeting?,” what I was
struggling to articulate was the act
itself—the coming together. I came to
this by trying all sorts of things.

Lisa: What were some of those
things?
Hillel: One exercise was two people
running towards each other, head on,
from one side of the room to the other,
and then seeing what they would do
when they met. But one of the main
ways we began was standing at arms-
length, facing each other. We’d come
to a stillness and then listen for the
moment to begin and then we’d begin.
We’d usually begin by moving
towards each other.
Lisa: What led you to take this approach?
4
Hillel: I took this from my studies in
the martial arts and the application of
martial principles and techniques to
my practice of Contact Improvisation.
Part of the essence of all the martial
arts is that you bring yourself to a
stillness. From there, one way to
work is to wait for the other person to
make a move, to initiate a motion or
an action. You are watching for the
moment the thought appears and is
followed through.

There is a saying in the martial
arts that the moment one person
moves it’s over. It’s pretty much
finished because you can either go
right in on that person because you
know what they’re going to do, or you
can let the energy come towards you,
draw it in and then redirect it My
understanding now is that it comes
down to how you hone your will and
the level of your concentration. I
developed this ability to concentrate,
have a single focus, and to be still,
from my practice of both martial arts
and Contact Improvisation.

Lisa: In an interaction of waiting for
someone to make a move what initiates
the movement?

Hillel: Your action arises spontaneously
from listening to what’s taking
place on an energetic level. In Martial
Dance we began by moving with parts
of our partner’s body that we felt
drawn to.
What I kept from this early work
were these fundamentals of being still,
listening, and being able to act spontaneously.
Another major part we kept was the coming together and how you
know where to go.

Lisa: How to continue?

Hillel: Yes. What is the first move?
I was interested in this with Contact
also. When people go to do Contact
that first moment is always very interesting.
People kind of saunter into the
room and begin to find a place to
touch, and it’s always different and
people do it in all sorts of ways, yet I
always felt that there was a certain
similarity in the coming together. The
focus and attention to it was not very
honed.
In the MD, that initial focus is
very important, as is the coming together
in a martial interaction. The
way I do it is I listen for where the
energy is—I listen to what the physical
motion is on the surface of the
person and also to where the person is
located internally—where the energy
within them is in motion and where it
is not in motion. When it’s not in
motion, if it’s not a cultivated stillness,
(a conscious stillness centered in a
particular place in the body), it’s going
to be a blockage, a holding of energy.

Lisa: Do you make a distinction
between a holding that you call a
block and a holding that’s functioning
to support the part that’s moving?
Hillel: Yes, of course, and much of
the dance is to free these holding
patterns so that they become supportive
of, rather than blocking, the movement.
In MD, motion is supported by
the place where the energy is still.
But to say that the energy is still is not
really what is happening. The energy
is never still. It’s actually in motion.
It’s just more collected. A collected
and coming-back-on-itself motion,
circular regeneration. In Tai Chi, the
center is described as a sphere, a ball
that is constantly turning, and that
turning is generating Chi. That is the
stillness I’m talking about. A very
alive stillness. One of the main focuses
of Martial Dance is the cultivation
of the lower center as used in the
martial arts and how to direct our
internal energies from this center.
I’ve danced with people who don’t
work with their lower center primarily.
Instead they work with a constantly
shifting center in their bodies. I do
this myself, especially in Contact, but
also in MD. This is a very different
idea than in the martial arts where
you’re always moving and projecting
from a specified center.

Lisa: I would say that Contact Improvisation,
as a proposal from the beginning,
seemed to be set up to explore a
moving center. Rather than locating
your center in a certain part of your
body, it gave you a practice of watching
the constant shifts of balance
taking place within you. And it never
included “power” as an image to
cultivate. That seems a fundamental
difference between a martial art and
Contact Improvisation.
Hillel: I think Contact was not concerned
with generating a force or a
power to travel along a defined line
into another body. To do that effectively
you need to be organized in
relation to the lower center in the
body.
Martial Dance incorporates the use
of a constantly shifting center and also
cultivates the lower constant center as
a source of movement. My initial
desire in doing MD was to understand
how to interact with any type of
movement energy, and this synthesis
gave me that ability.
My understanding of Contact Improvisation
was that it was a form for
moving with another person working
in gravity, which meant you could go
anywhere with it. What drew me to
develop MD was that I began to see
that there were certain movements that
people who do Contact didn’t know
how to interact with.
Lisa: In the sense that they would get
injured? Or that they chose not to
interact with it?

Hillel: It was outside the context of
an unwritten understanding in Contact
of “how we’re going to move together.”
In Contact, if a person shifts their
weight onto one leg and they lean on
me with their center up by their shoulder,
they create a ‘trim-tab effect’, or
fulcrum, in the body at their shoulder.
You can touch the body at a fulcrum
and the whole body moves very easily.
In martial arts, you work with
these same principles, except your
intention is different. While doing
Contact, I would begin to interject
more martial-oriented intentions while
moving, such as a ‘take-down’, a
throw, a push or a pull. In the beginning
I found that to take the action in
this direction was unfamiliar to people
who were doing Contact. Mostly, I
think that people who did Contact
didn’t have a martial mind or awareness.

Lisa: Or a desire?

Hillel: Yes, or a desire. I had this
desire because I was also a martial
artist. At the same time I felt that in
life there are many experiences where
you are being thrown. There are many
interactions where a person comes to
you and they’re not interested in flow,
they’re not interested in moving harmoniously
with you. There are also so
many things taking place in an interaction
with another person—how do you
know how to move with the interaction?
I found that the skills that I
learned from Contact didn’t empower
me to interact with all types of people.
I was always curious about a head-on
interaction, of meeting something
squarely and then seeing where you
move with that

Lisa: What other studies were valuable
in your development of MD?

Hillel: I was always interested in
interactive dance. I was very interested
in dancing with the projection of
my partner’s energy and movement in
space. Later, when I did Contact
Improvisation, it felt very akin to this
way I was working. It was like bringing
what I was doing from a distance
right to the body.

One of my teachers who I was
very influenced by in regards to interactive
movement from a martial perspective
was Milford Graves. I studied
with him over the course of a few
years at his center in NYC. The sessions
usually lasted about three hours.
He went from teaching African dance
to working with principles from Tai
Chi ‘push hands’ and Kung Fu ‘sticky
hands’. Once I had accomplished that
and had gotten strong, we started
doing harder styles that involved a lot
of kicking and punching and elements
of western boxing. We would work
out and spar constantly, with gloves.
I learned many things from Milford,
one of them being an understanding
of the connection between dance
and the martial arts. He talked to me
about how much of western dance is
feminine by nature, and that most of
the dance I had trained in was feminine
movement, and that I should learn
masculine motion. He said that in
African dancing the men do dances
that are actually preparation for battle.
He showed me certain movements and
he said, “Now you take this movement
and put a spear in the hand and you’ll
understand the movement,” and it was
like a flash of lightning. My training
with Milford Graves was a very intensive
one.
My senior year at Bennington
College I taught a class and called it
Martial Dance. At that time I incorporated
many of the movements I
learned from Milford which were
African in origin, martial movements
which involved a tremendous use of
the pelvis and hips.

Lisa: Do you still include some of
that material when you’re training
people in MD?

Hillel: No.
Lisa: What happened to those movements?
Hillel: I integrated them. For me it
was more a vehicle to understand
certain elements of motion, rhythm,
and the power generated from the
pelvis. My training and practice from
early on was in both dance and martial
arts. But I was more interested in
Contact Improvisation at this time. I
began to see the beauty of Contact and
went to master it very consciously—an
approach that comes from my martial
background.
Lisa: What skills did you find in
Contact to be mastered?
Hillel: For me they were really basic.
The give and take of weight; moving
with a point of contact, or, I like to
say the area of contact; the idea of
following; and, of course, surrendering
to gravity and falling. All of those
skills became part of MD.
Lisa: What skills from the martial
arts did you blend into those Contact
skills?
Hillel: In the earlier years of doing
Contact there was less focus on the
hands and more on the body. From
the martial arts, I began to incorporate
the use of the arms and hands to move
my partner. I saw that I had arms so
why not use them?
Lisa: Is it a volitional use of the arms
rather than a supporting use of your
arms?
Hillel: It’s both. I always felt that
there was no separation between information.
So I was able to translate all
my information and kinesthetic understanding
from my martial training into
my Contact practice and vice versa.
The skills I remember learning the
most from Contact were listening and
the ability to follow. Listening and
following are also two of the main
aspects of Tai Chi. Tai Chi is based
on yielding, unlike other martial arts
which are more offensive in nature.
Tai Chi has offensive elements, but it
is based on the understanding of being
able to yield, where the weak can
overcome the strong, the soft can
overcome the hard. In relation to
leading, I realized that if I didn’t master
following, I couldn’t lead effectively-
Following became a key focus in
MD. In Tai Chi, you’re always looking
for when the other person is off
center, or how to bring them off center.
Then you can take advantage of
that momentum by adding your own
energy to move them where you want
them to go.
In Contact Improvisation you interact
in a way that a martial artist never
would interact. For example, you are
making contact with all parts of the
body. You’re turning your back to
each other, where you have no focus
on defence. You’re allowing yourself
to be completely vulnerable. You’re
moving your center to different parts
of the the body. You’re letting your
weight pour into another person and
giving yourself away. You’re constantly
passing through your center
line like a pendulum.
To apply martial movement and
principles to this expanded set of possibilities
allows for a fuller range of
motion and interaction than is commonly
found in the martial arts. It
goes beyond the primary modes of
attack and defence to include also
support and surrender. This also expands
the interactive possibilities of Cl
to include the use of volitional force to
bring someone else to movement. So
by blending the two forms, MD trains
you how to respond in any given situation.
Four Modes of Interaction
Hillel: In the beginning, people started
to call what I was doing “combat
contact.” At that time there was very
little real blending of the two forms,
the Contact and the martial. I later
tried to blend things by working with
four modes of motion: attack and
defend, which is from martial arts,
support and surrender, which is from
Contact. I also worked with manipulation
physically and energetically. I
was interested in mixing these pieces
so that you could respond to an approach
in a way that you wouldn’t
normally respond. For example, you
wouldn’t normally respond to an attack
with a support. You would most
likely defend in some fashion, which
includes “neutralizing.” But you can
respond to an attack with a support.
Or vice versa.

Lisa: That’s interesting. Bonnie
Bainbridge Cohen uses the terms
“bonding” and “defending” as two
poles of an interaction.

Hillel: Yes, that’s beautiful, I think of
it as bonding, when I attack I’m bonding
with my partner’s energy. I’m
meeting it, engaging it, and creating a
particular effect with that energy. It’s
a very Aikido understanding—bonding—because
in Aikido there is no
opponent, you’re harmonizing with the
Ki of the person you’re moving with.
Lisa: Attack and support are easier
for me to build a physical image of.
Surrender doesn’t have as clear a
physical image for me.
Hillel: Because surrender as a concept
is the most difficult to understand
and to do, it is also the most difficult
to image physically, as opposed to
attack/defend/support. It involves an
image of “letting go,” no longer controlling,
almost a trusting that you will
be caught. There is also an image of
surrender as in “serving” in a higher
sense. Following can also be an image
for surrender. In MD, surrender
usually comes first in response to a
support, but it can also be a response
to an attack.

Lisa: And “yielding”?

Hillel: Yielding, in MD, is under the
category of defence. It is a Tai Chi
term, you “yield” to an attack. Yielding
is really the same thing as creating
space, making room. So when you
yield usually what you are doing is
withdrawing, drawing a circle around.
When you yield and withdraw, it is
also a drawing with. First you create
space by withdrawing, then there is
suddenly an opening and your partner
is drawn in and they cross their center
line.
One of the main focuses in MD is
this opening, this space. We dance
with an awareness of it. It is mainly
from here that we move our partner
and are moved. In Tai Chi this awareness
is also used.
Lisa: And then surrender may be...?

Hillel: Surrender works in a number
of ways. It works internally as a state,
as an action of the self. One way it
translates into movement is when
you’re allowing your center to be
taken and moved. For example, you
can surrender to a throw. In the martial
arts there is rarely an aspect of
surrender in movement, two exceptions
being in the practice of Aikido and Tai
Chi. The way Ueshiba set up Aikido,
you have uke and nage, and uke surrenders
and allows himself to be
moved. That’s the training and it’s
not an actual combat situation. In
MD, as in Aikido, you’re actually
training to be moved and you practice
being in your center when you’re
moved.

Lisa: The martial aspect of Martial
Dance is becoming clear to me and its
difference in intention from Contact
Improvisation. Can you talk about
what the full intention of Martial
Dance is? What are your practicing?
Hillel: It has to do with two things
that are a progression. The first is a
moving towards and the second has to
do with consciousness. The dance
becomes about where one is conscious
and where one is unconscious in relationship
and in the action of the body.
It’s very much a physical, emotional,
mental and spiritual experience.
Awareness of the body/self is
practiced through the purely physi-
cal/movement-oriented part of the
form. When people begin to learn
MD, they have a natural element of
surrender. Even if it manifests as
resisting, they’re already surrendering
on the level of taking a step towards
being moved by coming to meet me.
In MD, the interaction is about
coming towards each other, engaging,
and what happens in the meeting.
Even if the movement interaction is a
moving away it’s still an inner action
towards. The same way as I’ve said
that an attack can be support. In any
martial interaction, two people are
moving towards each other and are
committed to that. The nature of the
coming together is somewhat different
in MD. In a martial art they’re coming
to overpower and win. In MD,
even though you can overpower another
or allow yourself to be overpowered,
it is only one part of the dance.
The possible directions and dimensions
of the interaction are more varied.
The Will and the Center
Lisa: Can you talk about the use of
the will in Martial Dance?
Hillel: The use of the will in MD is
almost identical to its use in the martial
arts in terms of understanding
what an action is and the purpose of
an action. The will is simply how you
bring yourself to the interaction, how
you focus the power of the self.
I experience MD as an exercise of
my will. By will, here, I mean that
which is faster and higher than
thought, it precedes thought.
Lisa: / might call that “desire.”
Hillel: The reason I don’t call it
desire is because I attach desire to the
senses and I attach will to something
previous and above the senses, to the
life force that animates us. Although
they both act through the senses because
we’re in form.

Lisa: How does that relate to
moving?

Hillel: The action of the will is what
moves a person. When you engage
your will fully it’s the most direct
action you can have with another
person or with life. Much of the
training in MD is actually to cultivate
the ability to arouse and use your will.
What that action gives you is a taste
of being yourself with another person.

Lisa: What a luxury.

Hillel: It is not a luxury, it is a
choice. I have a good friend and
teacher, Meir Abehsera, who speaks
about making a demonstration of life
for a person who is depressed or really
stuck. When you engage a person in
the way I’ve been describing, they feel
it It awakens their memory. The
person begins to remember many
things, they remember their selves,
they remember where they come from.
I don’t mean memory like what you
did yesterday or the day before, I
mean the memory of the self. It can
be related to the memory of your life,
the path your life has taken, where you
started and where you’re at now,
where you’re going, or beyond that to
the memory of where your soul is
sourced from. This relates in movement
to the past of the action, the
present of the action, and the future of
the action. Or more simply put, where
the movement is coming from, where
it is now, and the trajectory of where
it is going to.
When a person experiences memory
it is one of the deepest, most beautiful
experiences, because in that moment
there is knowing. I use the
words “memory” and “home” interchangeably.
Many people forget what
home is, and if you remind them on a
basic level they return with a homing
instinct like a bird that flies back to its
nest.

Lisa: If you’re committed to working
on becoming aware, any kind of meditation
practice might bring you to
those places.

Hillel: Yes, in a way you could say
this about every higher discipline. But
at the same time, MD, as a practice
and discipline, is focused on relationship.
It’s the experience of these
things in relationship with another
person while in movement.
Another major component of MD,
the same as in Aikido and Tai Chi, is
understanding your center and your
balance. One way to break a person’s
masks, or defences, is by taking their
center and balance away.
There is a place within an inch or
two off the central equilibrium line,
working within a cone structure with
its base by the feet and its opening by
the head, that I describe as the point of
weightlessness. In MD we cultivate
the awareness of this balance/off-bal-
ance point, and we move and are
moved to this place and beyond. In
the beginning, this experience leaves a
person in unfamiliar territory and they
have an immediate response. Either
they’ll let go or they’ll resist. MD is
done in the context of constant and
continuous support so that when the
person experiences something being
broken, or “shattering,” as I like to
describe it, it happens in a context of
support.
Lisa: What follows the experience of
shattering?
Hillel: What happens next is that they
feel the support. Usually what they
feel is two things, first they feel themselves
moving freely, free of that
which they were holding. The next
thing they experience is being loved.
This allows a person to be more present.
Maintaining a constant presence
and awareness is a fundamental part of
one’s practice and development in
MD.
The Physical Practice
Lisa: Can you give an example of
how you develop the physical work?
Hillel: I work in different ways.
Taking from the martial arts, I work
with the tan-tien, a Chinese term for
the lower center in the body. It is a
center that is cultivated to build energy.
There is the understanding that
you can collect energy, build it, and
apply it. In more traditional dance,
like ballet and most forms of modem,
they usually move from a center that
is higher up in the body. The problem
with that, in a MD application, is that
you can’t generate the same kind of
power if the center is higher in the
body.
If a person isn’t moving from their
lower center, I dance with them wherever
they are. I organize my whole
body from that point of contact, to
make the most direct line through their
body into their lower center.
Often in working with people in
that way other parts of their bodies
will collapse. One of the techniques I
then began to work with was applying
pressure on both ends of the bone, so
that a person would get the idea, “hey,
there’s a line from one side to the
other and that line is very strong.”
Then I would line up and apply pressure
from their hand through their
wrist through the elbow through the
shoulder. Eventually, when that was
organized, I would line it up through
the shoulder down through the spine to
the center. Then, when I moved with
them along those lines, they would
start to feel themselves in their center.
I would be talking to that place
through the movement. I began to call
this technique shaping.
Lisa: It sounds like you’re practicing
a kind of hands-on repatterning work
in the dance. Do you teach students
to do that for each other?
Hillel: Yes. As students investigate
the effect of their actions on each
other, it is an immediate feedback
situation of what works and what
doesn’t and how it feels. I guide this
investigation with movement from Tai
Chi Chuan and from what has arisen
from the practice of MD itself.
I am also utilitizing work from
Moshe Feldenkrais, especially from his
early period which was more martial-
oriented. This hands-on manipulation
became part of MD, going hand in
hand with the non-manipulative aspects
of Contact Improvisation.
Using this shaping technique organizes
one to understand the lines of
motion in the body related to the center.
This organization enables one to
generate a force that can move through
the body most effectively. I talk about
this as creating a unified focus. Once
this skill is learned you begin to understand
where you can go with it, the
lines you can move on. These are
trajectories that extend beyond the
body that are based on lines that we
work with within the body. These
lines are structurally and energetically
oriented.
When I’m teaching I’ll take a
student off center. From there they
can experience the shape of their body
and the lines of motion along which
they can be moved. They can anticipate
all of the possible directions it
might go and be able to go there safely.
This is a similar way that they
work in Aikido.
Lisa: Can you talk more about your
work with Moshe Feldenkrais?
Hillel: Moshe Feldenkrais pointed out
that one movement in the human that
is superior to the movements that
animals have is our ability to turn
around ourselves, to swivel and pivot
at great speeds with almost no effort.
In MD and the martial arts, the power
generated from the pelvis and hips and
this turning Moshe talks about is used
constantly.
What I gleaned from Moshe’s
work was a way to organize the body
to move effortlessly. This effortlessness
comes from the ability to organize
yourself in a way that you can
generate a force through the skeleton.
It’s not a matter of muscular strength,
it’s the organization of one’s entire
system— nervous, skeletal, and muscular—for
one clear act.
I then incorporated this understanding
into moving with a partner, where
they could feel and become aware of
inefficiency and efforting in the dance,
and move with me or another to improve
their ability to organize efficiently.
Once you have these experiences
from the Feldenkrais method you
never lose them. They stick with you
as a constant reminder. I learned this
by doing many Awareness through
Movement lessons which are structured
to open up new movement configurations.
I have found no other
method that offers this the way
Moshe’s work does.
When you begin to organize your
body in a more efficient way and
move with a partner in this way, you
are only expending energy when you
need to. Of course you have different
ways of moving with different gradations
of energy that can change at any
moment. From something slow to
something fast. From something soft
or hard to a tremendous wave of energy
that moves through the body into
another person.
Most often when people learn new
movement they hold their breath.
When you move in the way I’m describing,
you never hold your breath.
The breath can be very conscious, as it
is in Tai Chi, where it’s slow, even,
and deep.

Lisa: Is there any more to say about
Moshe’s work and how it influenced
you?
Hillel: Many times when dancing
with someone, I feel that they have
very few options in their response. I
move with them in a way that shows
them that they have more than one
option of how to move and organize
themselves in any given situation.
Moshe spoke about how you should be
able to move at any point in time in
any direction without preliminary
preparation. This is a very martial
awareness.
Lisa: Is there any aspect of MD that
you think of as performance-oriented,
or is it purely a practice like a martial
art or social dance form?
Hillel: I see it as a practice and also
as a performance art. I can describe
some of my images of performance.
One image I have, and am attempting
to do in Israel now, is to have twenty
or more people doing MD in a large
space or gymnasium. It reminds me
very much of what was done in the
past in different martial schools in
Europe with fencing and in the East
where many people would be practicing
simultaneously in a martial hall.
The type of focus that people have
begins to resonate, and you can begin
to see the energies moving.
I also see performing MD where
people can have an experience watching
the inner workings of an interaction.
Two possible ways this can be
demonstrated are: One, where you
have two people who are both adept at
the form and can really move with it
The other is where one person is adept
and the other a beginner. There’s a
tremendous beauty that comes from
this interaction. The beginner is discovering,
learning, and doing in unpredictable
ways. Also the emerging of
the self is more tangibly visible. You
can see the meeting and the disappearing.
My feeling is to continue to perform
with dancers who have the ability
to be vulnerable in front of people,
where they’re actually learning and
patterns are being broken and new
ones created right in front of your eyes
and all the emotions are in motion.
The depth of what it means to have a
commitment to moving towards each
other can be seen and witnessed. I
first performed MD in this kind of
lesson-form in New York City in 1983
with Simone Forti.
For me, performance was sitting
and watching a lesson given by Moshe
Feldenkrais. It changes the idea of
what performance is.

---------------------------

Dancing chaos

by John Marinelli


Introduction
There is a fascinating relationship
between the evolution of structure in
improvisation and the scientific principles
of systems theory, colloquially
called chaos theory. In Order out of
Chaos, by Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle
Stengers, they describe and analyze
many self-organization processes in
inorganic and organic systems of
nature. By examining these processes,
they develop concepts that explain how
order is created out of chaos and argue
that it is a fundamental process in
nature. As improvisations evolve
through self-organization processes,
they can be described using terms from
chaos theory such as dissipative structures,
bifurcation points, attractors, and
fields.
In his article, "Dance Improvisation:
Creating Chaos," printed in the last
issue of CQ, Kent De Spain describes
how chaos can be used to explain how
seemingly random processes in improvisation
actually contain complex, innate
structures. He defines and explains
chaos, strange attractors, and
fractals and their relationship to improvisation.
I would like to continue the
dialogue between chaos and improvisa- tion
by giving some specific examples of 
how the self-organization process
occurs in several improvisational structures
that I have experienced and/or
created.
Order in improvisation often appears
chaotic, but when looked at more
closely, it has an underlying dynamic,
enfolded structure. Self-perpetuating
forms are often embodied in solo, duet,
or group improvised dancing. I have
seen such structures arise organically in
workshops that I have led and participated
in at improvisational jams and
collectives, and also in improvised and
loosely composed performances.
As animals, we self-organize because
of instinctual patterns. However,
we are also conscious, self-aware, and
self-reflective beings and these qualities
add complexity and the unknown to
self-organization as it occurs in improvisation.
The task of an improvisor is to
reach a singular point where she can
align with, and consciously go beyond,
habitual patterns. Following the flow
of events in an improvisation, she can
respond to and integrate the fluctuations
that occur in this open system.
With consciousness comes the responsibility 
to make choices about how, in
which direction, and in what context
the flow of interactions will evolve. At
every moment, with each fluctuation
and nuance, there is the potential for
new directions in an improvisation.
ATTRACTORS
An innate tendency in nature, embodied
in improvisation, creates structure
from random behavior. This tendency
to create structure takes place
within fields made up of various attractors.
"An attractor is a region of phase
space which exerts a 'magnetic' appeal
for a system, seemingly pulling the
system toward it."1 For example, if
marbles are rolled into a shallow, wide
bowl, they roll in various paths, dependent
on the force and angle at which
they are tossed. However, they will
always end up at the bottom of the
bowl unless they are thrown so hard
that they end up out of the bowl. Due
to the effect of Earth's gravity, the
bottom of the bowl becomes an attractor.
Earth's gravity affects everything in
its field: objects thrown into the air will
fall back to the Earth unless there is so
much thrust, as in space missiles, that
they end up outside Earth's gravitational
field. Because of the influence of
very powerful attractors like gravity,
magnetic fields, and large bowls, certain
behavior patterns can be predicted.

DISSIPATIVE STRUCTURES
"We now know that far from
equilibrium, new types of structures
may originate spontaneously.
In far-from-equilibrium conditions,
we may have transformation
from disorder, from thermal chaos,
into order... We have called these
new structures dissipative structures
to emphasize the constructive
role of dissipative processes in their
formation."2
A dissipative structure is the selforganization
process that occurs when
a system is disordered and far from
equilibrium. Dissipative structures can
be created through improvisation, and
are influenced by attractors that are a
combination of consciously set parameters
and innate behavior patterns. To
illustrate the self-organization process
in improvisation, I will be describing
some specific scores drawn from the
disciplines with which I have experience—contact
improvisation, theater
games, and movement improvisation.
There are two generic self-organization
processes. One type begins with a
random structure and, by using catalysts,
creates order out of chaotic conditions.
The other type begins with a
linear structure and, also by using
catalysts, evolves to a complex, nonlinear,
multi-causal feedback structure.
A catalyst is an element or instruction
added to a system that causes it to
change. For example, there is an old
saying that its easier to draw flies to a
teaspoon of honey than to twenty
pounds of vinegar. Hundreds of randomly
roaming flies will be attracted to
and will swarm around a teaspoon of
honey. In this case, the honey is the
catalyst that creates order out of chaos.
Let's begin with a discussion of the
first process, creating order out of randomness.
Imagine a structure where a
group of twenty or more people is
asked to move randomly in the space.
After a few minutes, each person is
instructed to keep another person in
sight at all times while continuing to
move randomly. An observable shift in
the spatial movement pattern in the
room occurs as each person makes
subtle adjustments to keep their chosen
person in sight. Although still apparently
chaotic, something more organized
 than the original random movement
occurs as the eyes become engaged
in a specific task. Next, each
person is asked to keep a second person
continually in sight while still
keeping the first in sight. A more
highly organized movement pattern
can be recognized as participants position
themselves to keep both their
people in sight. Finally, each person is
asked to keep three people in sight.
When the third person is added, a
strange attractor appears to emerge—
the edges of the space become attractors
as participants begin to gravitate
toward them.
Specific instructions can set up
conditions to create attractors that force
interactions toward an easily observable
direction. The combination of
gravity and the shape of a bowl will
cause marbles to end up at the bottom
of the bowl. In a similar way, when
twenty or more people, each trying to
keep three others in sight, is combined
with the four walls of the space, a
situation is created where people end
up at the edges of the space.
Dissipative structures are, by definition,
structures that expend energy as
they go through structural transformations.
The above score, like many
improvisational scores, is an example
of a dissipative structure, as the participants,
within the four walls, must continually
expend energy to keep the
movement system intact. (Note that
the "marbles at the bottom of the
bowl" example is not a dissipative
structure because once they come to
rest, the marbles do not actively interact
with the environment. This is
called a closed system.) The above score
is an open system because it dynamically
exchanges energy with the environment,
making it open to change. Let's
further analyze the sequence of events
in the above dissipative structure.
The first stage is simple random
movement in the space where a highly
complex order that approaches chaos
exists because of the infinite choices
available to the improvisors. This type
of system of called far-from-equilibrium
or chaotic. Structure develops each
time a person to keep in sight is added
to the random movement score because
it limits the possible choices and becomes
a feedback loop that organizes
the patterns in space. It is a dissipative
structure because it requires the energy
of each participant to maintain it.
Formed by fluctuations that are introduced
into a random exchange of energy,
this dynamic structure develops
through a series of movement interactions.
At the final stage, fluctuations can
continually occur. A person or two
may sporadically run through the center
and to another edge of the space to
keep their three persons in sight, which
causes others to readjust their positions.
Based on simple instructions, the
constant shifting that occurs is due to
the many feedback loops that continually
interact Although the final part of
the exercise can be allowed to go on
until the structure appears to be static,
the fact that each person is watching
three others keeps the interaction with
the environment alive.
The energy that is constantly being
expended to maintain the system becomes
obvious when the instruction to
discontinue the exercise and move
however they like is given. Usually,
the participants will breathe a collective
sigh of relief and immediately allow
the structure to dissolve.
The point at which a structure
evolves to a different level of complexity
is called a bifurcation point. In the
above exercise there were three major
limitations imposed and each of these
limitations created bifurcation points.
At each stage of the exercise, the instructions
forced the behavior to
change. Since each person had to keep
an eye on one or two others, individuals
organized into a group through
feedback loops. As the first and second
perosns were added, an observable
shift occurred in the movement patterns
throughout the entire space.
When the third person had to be kept
in sight, this small change, or fluctuation,
created an effect that dramatically
changed the spatial orientation of the
participants. This non-linear relationship,
where a small fluctuation can
have a major impact, is a unique and
dramatic aspect of dissipative structures.
The reader may be able to think
of examples from their own improvisations
in which structure is similarly
generated.

CONTACT IMPROVISATION
SCORES
Another example of a process that
begins with a random structure and
evolves to a complex structure is what
I'll call a Contact Improvisation landscape
score. It is derived from a structure
I participated in, taught by Nancy
Stark Smith. As they enter the studio
space, people begin by "arriving" into
the sensations of their bodies. Often
this is done by lying down and experiencing
their bodies in the state between
stillness and movement. By doing the
smallest possible perceptible movements,
they explore their "skin-
esphere," their bodies inside the skin.
They go on to explore their kinesphere,
or "reach space," as they mobilize their
bodies into movement and connect
their inner and outer worlds, eventually
taking their movement into space.
Then there is a "grazing" stage where
participants move through the space
and make brief physical contact with
others. Eventually, each person maintains
a contact connection with one
other person and the duet develops.
Here the attractors of physical contact
and sharing weight are apparent. A
field is generated by using the Contact
Improvisation duet form within this
landscape score.
There are many contact scores that
begin with a simple, single, cause-and-
effect structure and build in complexity.
For example, there is a simple
exercise in which two people share and
shift their weight through back-to-back
contact As one person takes a step
forward, the partner, in order to maintain
contact, follows by taking a step
backward. The partners can take several
steps or even walk back and forth
through the space while continuing to
maintain back-to-back contact. However,
if the partners begin stepping sideways
slightly, torque is added, and this
makes back-to-back contact more difficult
to maintain, especially if they begin
to move through the space faster.
As the partners begin to lose contact,
the exercise approaches chaos or
the far-from-equilibrium state. There is
so much new input in the form of
speed, direction, and momentum changes,
that the system cannot maintain its
form. The duet must either evolve to
another level of complexity or the
dance must stop. If the partners maintain
the essence of the exercise, it becomes
a complex and unpredictable
dance, structured by the attractors of
weight sharing, gravity, momentum,
etc The dance can be described as a
dissipative structure that is maintained
by the energy and intention of the
dancers within a specific format.
To summarize, the above structure
begins as a simple set of instructions
(order) and goes through a phase that
approaches chaos. As the structure
approaches chaos or far-from-equilibrium
conditions, the feedback loop created
by the contact and weight-sharing
attractors cause it to self-organize to a
more complex level, creating a dance.
Each time the dance evolves from the
same exercise, even by the same partners,
the direction the dance takes will
be entirely different. The exercise is of
an archetypal order called a dissipative
structure because it is created by the
dissipation of energy in open conditions.
This open system is vulnerable
to minor fluctuations that cause it to
evolve in a unique direction each time
the score is followed.

THEATER GAMES

Let's take an example of how to go
from the simple to the complex using
theater games. With eight to twenty
people in a circle, the object of the
game is to make a sound of one to four
syllables with an associated movement
and pass it to the next person. That
person in turn passes it to the person
next to them and so on around the
circle. The object is to pass the sound
and movement exactly as you see and
hear it It will be observed that even if
each person passes exactly what they
see and hear, they each have a different
body and voice, so the sound and/or
movement changes slightly. Invariably,
the sound changes dramatically even
after only a few times around the circle.
Tiny fluctuations build one on the
other until the final sound and movement
is completely transformed.
Another theater game, common in
traditional theater improv, is called
"yes-and." It goes something like this:
Two people enter an empty stage and
their task is to create a spontaneous
theater piece. One person will begin
with an action or statement that describes
either where they are, who they
are to each other, or what they are
talking about. One person says something,
the next person says "yes" to
that reality and adds a related element
to it. The first person now adds another
element and this continues back
and forth until an entire scene is built.
I will try it now as I'm writing.
A. This is a nice oak table.
B. Yeah, I bought it yesterday.
A. Isn't that full-length mirror new
too?
B. No. I have had that for a while
now. About six months.
A. I lost three hundred dollars the last
time I was here in your apartment.
B. Yeah, I found it.
A. Can I have it back?
B. No. I bought the desk with it.
Anything I find in my apartment
automatically becomes mine.
A. But I'm your father! I needed that
money to buy your mother our thirtieth
wedding anniversary gift.
B. I know. That's why I bought this
desk. Isn't thirty years the oak anniversary?
A. Son! I knew you wouldn't let me
down. I'm ashamed to say that I came
here not trusting you.
B. I know, Dad. But I'm sure glad
that 20-1 longshot, "Prodigal Son,"
that I bet the whole three hundred on,
won the race. I'm now in the money
and you're happy.
A. What?!
A whole scene was created by
agreeing to what was just said and
adding to it. Note that B said no to A's
request for getting his money back.
This is still saying "yes" to the improvisation
because he agreed that the
three hundred dollars existed. The
whole scenario was built very quickly
by using "yes-and." It is a game that
increases in complexity until content is
generated. In it, the partners did not
know where the story was going, and
could not know, because they didn't
know what the other person would
say. Even so, we discovered in only a
dozen exchanges, that they were father
and son, the father was married for
thirty years, the son was a gambler, the
father lost three hundred dollars, they
were at the son's apartment and many
other pieces of information including
some undertones of their history.
This dissipative structure builds in
complexity by adding elements incrementally.
It starts simply and expands
exponentially as meaning begins to
manifest. Soon, the interaction transforms
into a scene with place, relationship,
conflict, and content.

FIELDS IN IMPROVISATION
The cumulative effect of the attractors
in an improvisation creates a field
that contains a range of interaction
possibilities. Within both contact and
acting improvisations there are many
scores and approaches, but taken as a
whole each has certain characteristics
that set it apart from the other.
If a collaboration was set up where
one person was experienced in contact
improvisation while the other person
was experienced in acting improvisation,
they would at first be confused
about how to approach their explorations
together, which would create an
open, chaotic situation. If they persist
in their collaboraiton, they will evolve
some kind of structure together which
could be very interesting. This would
most likely begin as a more open structure
than either of their respective
forms and the ensuing process would
be unique.
Improvisational forms result from
many interconnected feedback loops
that create the strange and complex
patterns called fields. Some of these
fields have names because they have
been around long enough to have been
named, others will develop names, and
still others will exist nameless but
equally distinct.

GRID-WORK SCORES

Another example of a field is the
grid-work score that I gleaned from
various teachers including Richard
Bull, Robert Dunn, and Danny Lepkoff.
The grid is an elementary field within
which interactions take place. Let's use
a basic grid-work score to explore complexity
when working improvisationally.

Imagine the following simple grid.
Divide a square or rectangular space
into an infinite number of parallel horizontal
and vertical lines. The instruction
is simply to walk along these horizontal
and vertical lines and turn 90
degrees either to the right or the left.
Envision the following sequence of
events with four improvisors doing this
score. After a few minutes, the movement
patterns become interspersed
with recognizable groupings of two,
three, or four people. As the improvisors
begin to follow their various paths,
they intersect more or less randomly.
At times they may be at the edges of
the space, clustered in the center of the
space, randomly interspersed in the
space, and in various groupings
throughout the space.

Eventually the improvisors notice
feelings, sensations, patterns and
thoughts related to where they are in
the space and in relation to others in
the space. With this added awareness,
these randomly produced relationships
can generate scenarios, characters, and
stories. What begins as a simple spatial
interaction can transform into complex
content through the many feedback
loops intrinsic to a human being.
An example: Five improvisors are
walking randomly in a room Two
people begin to follow a line from
opposite directions so they are on a
collision course. They turn simultaneously
to avoid colliding. After a
while, they walk toward each other
again and since each expects the other
to turn, they collide. Now the interaction
may leave the purely spatial realm
as the improvisors become psychologically
involved. They may look for
opportunities to walk toward each
other again and purposely collide, or
see how close they can come without
colliding. As other improvisors become
aware of this change of focus,
they begin to collide with each other or
avoid each other at the last moment.
The individuals become a group that
has created a field of colliding and
avoiding.

Adding elements to an improvisation
such as entering and exiting,
sounding and vocalization, polarities
such as moving/stillness, up/down,
fast/slow, and changes in dynamic
qualities can act as catalysts to develop
the complexity within a score in specific
ways. Consider the following example.
Walk along the parallel grids
described above, turning 90 degrees
right or left. Add the instruction of
stopping intermittently and moving.
Interactions develop as the improvisors
explore spatial relationships through a
rhythm of stopping and starting. Now,
if the direction to turn your head as
you walk is added, so that you are
looking at other people and the environment,
the resulting complexity
seems to develop more confrontational
or emotiqnal content. Whatever elements
are introduced, if the improvisors
allow complexity to develop without
forcing their actions, self-organization
occurs organically.

Random movements evolve into a
dissipative structure that, if continued
long enough, goes through stages of
complexity. Each time a new element
is introduced, it will develop fluctuations
and one of two things may happen.
The system may be able to damp
or inhibit the fluctuations and maintain
its present form. Or, if the fluctuations
generate enough critical behavior, the
system will be forced to reorganize to a
greater level of complexity because it
cannot integrate the new element in its
present form.

When a system reorganizes, it does
so because fluctuations can catalyze the
self-organization process inherent in its
field. It is important to note another
possibility: a system can dissolve in its
attempt to reach another level of complexity,
and random behavior will result.

The interesting thing about grid
work is the transformation of movement
into meaning that continually
occurs within the score. The grid model
underscores this movement-into-
meaning attractor that, in my opinion,
is always a part of good improvisation
and is inherent in the process that leads
to good composition. If improvisors
can follow self-organization processes,
and allow these processes to influence
them, then movement archetypes and
structures will form organically.

CONCLUSION
Due to the diverse nature of various
attractors in different forms of
improvisation, they each self-organize
in unique ways, dependent on initial
conditions as well as on added instructions
or elements. Each improvisation-
al form; e.g. contact, acting, movement,
music, movement theater, dance theater,
music theater, choreographic, etc.,
has a variety of attractors that create
the fields within which interactions
occur. Each form contains its own
attractor states, due to the rules by
which they play. For example, physical
contact is an attractor for contact improvisation
and creating dialogue is an
attractor for theater games. These
forms have an important complex
element in common—the human being.
This results in an exponentially complex
system.
In open improvisations, as participants
follow impulses and develop
complexity in the moment, they align
with and unleash unpredictabale patterns
of behavior. These patterns arise
as a result of the delicate and dynamic
balance between chaos and order.
When unique structures form spontaneously
as improvisations develop, we
find that unpredictability, non-linearity,
complexity, asymmetry, and irreversibility
are the rules and the possibilities
are limitless. This is the science of
what we experience as the joy, fun,
excitement, and enticement of improvisation.


QUESTIONS regarding Chaos and Improvisation

Is there absolute reality or only perceived reality? Is there reality
without the observer? Do we see only a part of reality or do we see
all of reality because we create it? Is there the potential for a multiplicity
of possible realities in one mind?

What is created in improvisation? Is an improvisation only a
regurgitation of what we already know? Is it simply bringing out what
is already in us? Can something new be formed in improvisation that
has never existed before? Can improvisation be the uncovering of
existing patterns and the creation of new patterns?
What is exciting about improvisation? Why improvise? What is improvisation
making a statement about? Is it about the possibility of a
new way of being/becoming, an understanding about a universal
query or dilemma, delight in discovering the moment? Is it enough to
improvise because it’s fun?

Is there a goal to improvisation? Is the goal to be in process? Is
that a contradiction in terms?

What is the best way to set up the conditions for improvising? Is
the universe always improvising or is everything predetermined?
What is chaos and what is order? Is complete chaos possible?
Are chaos and order only temporary conditions? Are chaos and order
mutually exclusive or are they only words describing diverse aspects
of something observed?

What creates form? How does form arise? What are we doing
here? How did we get here? How did we get to be here? Where
are we going? Who cares? Why should we care? What does it
mean to care? What, if anything, is important enough to care about?
Is that nihilism?

Is something that is complex always more open to change? How
complex must something become before it cannot change or before it
must change? How many feedback loops does an open system need
in order to maintain its integrity?

Can time go backwards? What is time? Does time really exist?
Or is it the result of change? Is time only a linear progression of
clock ticks? Is personal time different than clock time? Is time
based on perception of how long it takes to do something? Is there
time without an observer? Does time arise from the infinite entropy
barrier?

Does improvisation get to the point about time in that the improvisor
tunes in to the moment and to the concept of constant change? If
time doesn’t exist, why is it so difficult to get in touch with the present
moment? Or is it? Is it possible to be anywhere except the present
moment?



--------------

SPACE MOVEMENT and MEANING with an introduction by Christina Svane and notes by workshop participants

by Robert L. Schwarz


Introduction
When I first heard Bob explaining his discoveries about
how spatial orientation forms the metaphorical basis of all
thought, I felt the thunder and lightning that was flashing in
the night outside his house in rural Ohio suddenly move
inside. I told him there were a whole lot of dancers out there
who’d like to hear what he had to say. He took some
convincing, but an open mind is his field. I gave him an
issue of CQ and asked him to come do a workshop with me
in Amsterdam, where I live. I wanted some of his rain to fall
on afield in which seeds of a new vocabulary for experience
are sprouting.
The multi-dimensional nature of experiencing the body-
mind as a whole, is turning out to be such a massive challenge
to the structure of language that something’s gotta
give. Experience has been doing all the giving for so
long—letting itself be misrepresented by inadequate models
and rigid structures—that it’s language’s turn to do some
giving. And if anyone is going to be able to turn the fiat map
of language’s representation of experience into a globe, it’s
going to be dancers: You can’t explore the territory without
moving through it. Bob’s research could help us.
In suggesting this collaboration, / also had a point I
wanted to make to the scientific community, through Bob
(though he is definitely, as he puts it, “an out-of-the-mainstream
thinker”). I wanted to show that a dance studio with
a group of dancers trained in self-observation and experiential
thinking is an ideal environment in which to think. And
not only think, but gain new insights, solve problems, serious
global problems, by allowing the innate wisdom of the
bodymind to shed light on them through intuitive metaphorical
connections. What logical process can compare with the
body’s ability, for instance, to create itself from a single
fertilized egg? Or even to heal a cut finger?
To think of thinkers thinking with no sense of the body’s
wisdom gives me a cold chill because of the cold conclusions
they could come to. No wonder we find ourselves in a world
rich in heartlessness. Making ourselves of service as
perspective-enlargers, bodymind thinking advisers, could be
a channel for direct political action. Solutions to impossible
problems are the specialty of geniuses, and they generally
report having found them through a kinesthetic experience.
Whether they watch us dance with the images of a problem,
or move themselves, the chances of triggering such leaps of
intuition would be increased.
By the fourth day of our five-day seminar, Bob did indeed
leap, and he held out his hand and we all leapt with him. He
had been woken in the middle of the night with a revelation
of a possible model of...here I pause, for although the model
was exhilaratingly clear (and drawn from current scientific
theories on chaos), what it was a model of was so basic, I
can only think to call it Presence.
I don’t think Bob would mind if I said he had started out
as something of a skeptic regarding the capacity of movement
improvisation to deliver profound information. So the fact
that observing our process led him to new insights seemed an
especially exciting turn of events. In some ways, the model
he came up with was a present to us, a portrait of what he
saw us doing, and a shift in his focus from tracking meaning
in language to meaning in experience. For us, it was a gift
of an elegant language in which to articulate, and perhaps
explain, our work when it works best.
Each day, Bob would begin with a lecture, followed by
discussion. Then I’d suggest ways of taking the key points as
foci for moving (alone or with a partner), observing our
experiences while entering the states the focus illuminated.
Then we’d write—immediate, spontaneous expressions of that
state. We would then read these “reports” aloud, compare
our findings, and move on.
Bob’s first order of business was to point out that space
doesn’t exist, that it is created in our minds when we’re
children in order to be able to think. Bob then gave us a list
of motional terms from a paragraph by Aristotle, to show that
thinking is a choreography of shifting spatial orientations in
an imagined space where, in order to participate, all of life
must be reified, turned into “things.” If you can’t move them
around, you can’t think about them.
To take space away from a dancer who has built up a
complex conceptual relationship to it is asking for trouble.
The effect of thinking about this was disturbing to some of us
at first, but the effect of moving with it was liberating. And
it provided the ground for what developed into the confirmation
of experience—rather than thought—as the basis for
knowledge.
The workshop and the writings it produced, some of
which appear in this article, are just the beginning of what
I hope will continue in the form of further collaborations
between dancers and researchers in other fields, using
language as the common ground from which to generate the
experience of mutual discovery and, staying faithful to that
experience, discover new ways to generate language.

Between October 19th and 23rd, 1992, Christina
Svane and I offered a seminar, “Spatial Orientation: A Key
to Meaning in Thought and Movement.” The seminar was
held at the School for New Dance Development, Amsterdam,
under the auspices of I.D.E.A., International Dance Exchange
of Amsterdam. It was inspired by my ongoing research into
the ontogeny of the concept of space and the role that body
postures and movements play in the processes of abstract
thinking. Although these two areas might at first seem
disparate, in practice they are intimately interrelated, especially
for dancers.
This seminar proved a valuable learning experience both
for me and Christie, and for the dancers. For my part, it
provided an opportunity to have people experienced in
kinaesthetic perception and body movement test my hypotheses
firsthand and to report back to me the details of their
findings. As they reported at the end of the seminar, the
dancers discovered within the ideas presented new dimensions
to the possibilities of dance, which enriched their abilities to
perform and even simply to explore improvisatory movement,
certainly part of the matrix of creativity in dance.
The seminar began with the examination of how we
construct our notion of space. I found that dancers generally
entertain “space” as a rather concrete “something” that acts
as a kind of silent partner in their movements. I state that
with purposeful ambiguity because each dancer had a slightly
different concept of space as it related to dancing. Some saw
it as a medium in which to move; others, as a framework by
which to orient their movements.
My approach to the concept of space is anchored in the
history of it in the physical sciences, the philosophical
analysis of it by the neo-Kantians, notably Hans Vaihinger,
and the perspective of developmental psychology, drawing
heavily on the work of Jean Piaget. I presented this approach
not as a revealed truth but as an alternative. For the dancer,
this approach has the consequence of directing attention away
from the supposed external framework, the absolute framework
of Newtonian physics, the benchmarks around the room
relative to which the dancer conceives her movements, and
refocuses it on the dancer’s body. In other words, rather than
perceiving the physical ambiance as that to which her
movements are oriented, the dancer refocuses on herself as
the fulcrum of movement and the primary measure of what
her movements mean. This refocusing takes place—and this
is extremely important—within the context of a restructuring
of inner experience. It is this restructuring, this phenomenological
transformation, that is the launching pad for a new
or extended repertoire for thinking about movement and
actually projecting this thought into dance.
Precisely here the dancers reported a significant expansion
in the practice of their dancing. This new notion of space
opened to them hitherto unrecognized paths for experiencing
their own bodies and for moving in choreographically
meaningful ways. Mary Overlie, one of the participants in
the seminar, put it this way in her notes:
“I had a very strong and amazing experience when I
worked by myself with the word ‘through’ in conjunction
with moving without the concept of space. I
suddenly had a whole new movement vocabulary
available to me that I recognized as what some
dancers automatically have and which I have never
been able to find. It had to do with how I was
conceiving my movements. I had for many years and
perhaps always moved with a strong concept of space
and this took away some of the very consequential
quality that some dancers have: ‘This is it, this is all
there is, it stops here'. Very heavy, weighted and
substantial [quality] because it is not spreading itself
out beyond into the negative of the unseen."
Patricia Bardi, another of the participants, observed that “I let
go of the deliberateness of seeing, sensing, imagining,
carrying upwards and outwards.” I take this to mean that she
focused on her body-centered present moment, what Christie
came aptly to call the ‘‘now plane.”
I think it worth emphasizing that this whole exercise in
conceptual transformation—changing from conceiving space
as a “thing” to thinking of it as a mental artifice—took place
as much through movement exploration as through discussion.
It was part of the artfulness brought by Christie to this
enterprise that she had the dancers explore through movement
all of the abstract matters placed before them in discussions.
This made the learning experience more complete, more
holistic, for the participants while providing me with invaluable
feedback. That the dancers reported crucial changes in
their experience of movement after assimilating the new
approach to space gave empirical evidence for the pivotal
nature of conceptual space in the co-creation of meaning and
movement in dance.
Having established a revised orientation to space, we
moved in the seminar to the examination of the role of body
movement and posture in the process of thinking. This
touched on the heart of my own research, which began from
a study of the function of metaphor in human thought. My
point of departure had been the thesis of George Lakoff and
Mark Johnson in their book, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1980). According to Lakoff
and Johnson, our attitudes toward various ideas may be
gleaned from everyday expressions about these ideas. When
we use expressions such as, “I shot his argument down,”
“She won the debate,” and “His argument crumbled under
attack,” we are plainly treating argumentation as if it were a
form of warfare. Warfare, in other words, is our metaphor
for argumentation. We could just as well conceive it as a
form of dance. In that case, we might use expressions such
as, “She made beautiful countermoves to each sortie,” “Our
points coincided rhythmically,” etc.
What is crucial to the Lakoff and Johnson thesis, it
seemed to me, was that we can understand any one thing
only in terms of another. Metaphor, therefore, is central to
human thought. With that in mind, I began collecting the
metaphors underlying the great ideas of Western philosophy,
then branched out to include law, religion and the sciences.
This led me to the surprising discovery that in the entire
history of civilization, all the major ideas were based on 29
basic metaphors, forming what might be called a genetic
alphabet of human thought. To support this hypothesis, I
began to trace the etymology of the vocabularies surrounding
these major ideas, with the intent that, if the roots for these
vocabularies clustered around the governing metaphors, it
would lend support to my hypothesis.
It was in carrying out this comparative etymological
research that I noticed a curious fact: many abstract nouns are
formed from a concrete nominative or verbal core to which
a spatial prepositional or postpositional element is attached
Across languages this is true. Take the word, “prediction.”
The core, “diction,” meant originally “the act of saying.”
The prefix, “pre,” means “before.” Thus, prediction is a
“saying before.” Further, I went on to notice, the key words
which seem to advance any discourse are words of motion,
that is, words that either indicate a motion or that contain
within themselves etymological remnants of motional
meaning. “Involve,” for example, has the root “volvere,” a
Latin verb meaning “to turn.”
From all this, I deduced that motion must somehow
underlie our thought processes. I then remembered Piaget’s
research into the mental development of children, which
showed that children first learn to think by internalizing
action schemes. An action scheme is a movement or series
of movements required to accomplish a given end, like
walking, picking up an object, throwing it, and so on. On the
rough rule of thumb that ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny,
or that the development of the species and of the individual
parallel each other, my final hypothesis, the one I brought to
the seminar, was that the architecture of human thought was
erected around the experience of what the body can do and
how objects can be manipulated. A similar thesis is found in
Mark Johnson’s The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of
Meaning, Imagination, and Reason (Chicago and London:
University of Chicago Press, 1987), but Johnson pursues a
much broader course than mine primarily because he did not,
as I did, begin from a concise system of universal metaphors.
The specific manipulations I consider are covered under what
mathematicians call topological transformations. These are
transformations that, roughly speaking, alter the position,
location or overall shape of an object.
It should now become obvious why the refocusing of the
dancer’s attention on his own body as foreground, through
the reconceptualization of space, would be important to the
exploration of primal meaning in movement. Space, time,
mass, gravity, inertia and countless other essential abstractions
from which our reality is formed are not so much
external a priori givens as they are a posteriori creations out
of the matrix of body experience. The exigencies of daily
life make us put the cart before the horse. These abstractions
arose to facilitate action and survival, so they must be
assumed, which means they are unconsciously given the
status of so-called objective reality rather than being held as
part of the social construction of reality.
For dance and movement research, this strongly suggests
that there is a core repertoire of movements and body
postures or attitudes that carry in them a fixed set of meanings.
It seems possible that this repertoire might offer the
much needed conceptual framework around which to create
an objective nomenclature to describe dance and dance-
related movement. Comparative etymological research
indicates that this repertoire is transcultural, that it has the
value of universal applicability. However, the collective
experience of participants in the seminar demonstrated that
the role of this putative repertoire is not by any means
straightforward. Nevertheless, I believe it can be delineated
from outside dance—through linguistic analysis, gestural
study, and topology—and then sorted out, so to speak, in the
experience of dance and body movement research.
One of the exercises in the seminar had dancers exploring
the topological notion of “in.” They were free to do this in
whatever way struck them, and afterward, they noted down
their experiences. I quote in part the notes of Mary Overlie
on this exercise:
‘“in’ without perspective, just detail, just knowing,
less and less direction forward, quickly reduces to a
state like standing in a room and taking in all I can.”
This captures nicely the phenomenological character of the
experience, and then she goes on:
“the best vehicle for ‘in’ seems to be love rather than
greed because love allows me to be in and in and in,
seeing more and more ways to be in.”
Shades of James Joyce’s Molly Bloom. What is to be noted
here is the complication of personal association. Our
experiences are never pure in the sense of consisting only of
some primal meaning element stripped of personal association.
Nor is personal association the only layer imposed on
any primal core of meaning. There is also the layer of
cultural conditioning. Dance movements characteristic of an
ethnic tradition exemplify, but certainly do not exhaust, the
cultural patina. Gestures, gaits, rites, and everyday routines
also go to make up the cultural layer.
Recognition of these complications led to the unanticipated
consideration in the seminar of the creative process in
dance; exactly how does a dance, a movement improvisation,
evolve from the central viewpoint of the dancer? In attempting
to answer this question, I introduced a holographic model
of brain function that has a fairly wide acceptance in current
neurology and cognitive science. Coupling this to a fractal
hierarchy, we arrived at a model that the dancers felt accorded
well with their experiences in improvisation and choreography.
For those unfamiliar with holography and fractal mathematics,
a few words of explanation may be in order. First,
a hologram is a special kind of photograph produced with
coherent light. One laser beam is focused on something to be
photographed and the reflected light returning to the photographic
plate is allowed to interact with a reference beam
from a mirror. Where the two beams come together, the light
waves create patterns of interference, resembling what might
be seen by throwing thousands of pebbles all at once into a
pond. When the photographic plate is backlighted by a laser,
the original scene is seen as if through a window, in three
dimensions.
Holograms have two remarkable properties that make
them ideal models for information storage in the brain. First,
simply by altering the angle of the photographing laser, you
can store hundreds of images on a single plate. The images
remain discrete and clear. Second, every part of the hologram
contains the whole image. The smaller the fragment,
the fuzzier the image but it is everywhere present in a
complete form. These properties correspond to our present
understanding of how the brain works.
As for fractals, they are patterns with the unique property
of self-similarity. This means that no matter how greatly you
magnify any one part, you see a pattern similar to the whole.
The analogy to holograms is obvious. Fractals are generated
by graphing special functions called recursive functions.
Technically, x = f(y) and y = f(x). What is unique about
recursive functions is that you can calculate them only step
by step, because the first value of x, say, must be fed into the
equation for y before the consequent value of y may then be
used to figure out the next value of x, and so on. Recursive
functions therefore are at once deterministic and yet unpredictable.
You cannot project ahead to future values without
passing through all the intervening steps.
I introduced the hypothesis of a fractal hierarchy to
explain how the mind operates in improvisational dance
because it accounts well for how the dancer passes from
image (hologram) to image logically but unpredictably. The
basic notion is that each moment-as-experienced grows out of
the previous one deterministically but often unpredictably.
Then, if the dancer is conceived as embedded always in a
larger context, part of the whole, we have a fractal hierarchy.
Mathematically it can be shown that such a hierarchy can
explain how the mind and the universe operate according to
many traditions of mysticism as well as the principles of
modern theoretical physics. We all found it rather remarkable
that certain mystical concepts that had evolved centuries
ago could also be deduced through purely scientific principles
and that they could then be verified, at least in a limited way,
through the experience of dance.
Looking back on all this now, I feel that a surprising
amount was achieved in that modest seminar in Amsterdam.
It helped me sort out my ideas on how body movement
underlies thought, and it evidently enriched the creative
ability of the dancers, judging by their comments. From the
results of the seminar, I have been able to begin developing
a comprehensive framework for the analysis and description
of dance movement in which core universal meanings link
with cultural-gestural norms and complexes of personal
associations. Working out this framework is helping me
more concretely realize my original thesis about the role of
body movement in thought processes and, at the same time,
is making possible a system of body movement analysis that
should be valuable to the dance community at large. I hope
to be able to continue this research with Christie and others
in further seminars.

“NOW PLANE” REPORT / Christina Svane
The watched pot boils slowly. The Now Plane is always
full of portraits. What is difficult is to find any reason
to move. Breath. Neglected joints, tissues, request it.
Regarding the intersection of Now and Image, the image
had first to be awareness of body. So many layers to be
aware of. This process has a preparation phase. The Now
Plane does hinge upon the body. The body needs time to
remember its own complex chords. One doesn't hear all
the instruments in the orchestra at once. Roving is part of
Now. Images fleet. A fleet of images. An association
seems the next step. Image first. Awareness. Image.
Association.
.. .Sliding my head to the floor, my vision darkened.
Associating darkness with deep space, space of night,
space of stars, space without body or name, my sensations
registered op a kind of launch-pad, a framework to be left
behind. This was peaceful, a place to begin from.

“CARRIED” REPORT / Andrea Hugueney
Direct, together, weight. Feeling of taking, of being
taken. The whole body involved, organic. Heavy.
Straightforward, more sexual than sensuous. Muscular,
grounding, primitive. You know what is
happening. No thinking. (Observation: If we put
these words in groups, I would say ‘in’ goes with
‘carried’, and ‘with’ goes with ‘primary’.)

“WITH” REPORT / Andrea Hugueney
“re-entering the state of the word,
the word embodied the experience.”
Caring. Together. Quite light. Sharing something.
Aware of the other totally. How she feels. How she
moves. Her quality of movement, her mood. It sticks
together sometimes but not like ‘in’. ‘In’ is like one; with
‘with’ there are two. Feeling someone very strongly.
Sensuous, fluid.

“WITH” REPORT / Dominic Barter
Relates.
fluctuate
foot turning to miniscule vibrations
along a net defined only
back-lit body, vivid mass
my intuitive physics says that
all mass radiates light
separation random, unimportant
an obsolete quality of a dance
crescents, tops, ships, gardens
—all more immediate
body sliding through
now ghost of space has been banished,
random floor, uncertain ceiling...

REPORT / Mary Overlie
We then did some moving using these words—object,
in, through, with, attain, until, primary, first, carry, far—as
the subject.
It was astonishing to me that when Christie and I did
some Contact work with these words, we were able to be
in the Contact dance with such completeness and clarity.
It was as though we were actively discovering and practicing
the principles of Contact in a way that I had never
heard them referred to but that was beyond a doubt one of
the key realities of how it functions and why. Like a basic
ABC of Contact, shall we say? The experience of it rather
than the technical how-to-do-it mechanically. Then functional,
mental emotional reality.

“IN” REPORT / Mary Overlie
‘in’ to him
a breathless experience travelling to the small
small becomes love
travelling becomes love
everything is tender.
breathless is fear and growth
fear of knowledge-growth, fear of becoming more, fear of
closeness, travelling to less-defined.

“IN” REPORT / Christina Svane
Slow, dark, safe curled into you, testing the next degree,
checking can I come farther in, more welcome? Yes,
and yes, and Yes. The almost nostalgic waving of goodbye
to fear, the coolness of absence of friction-warm-tension.
Yet holding and keeping this bond, situation of ‘in , like a
vessel, not dropping or spilling, myself as the contents,
therefore being careful, and knowing it will change.
After this, being able to embrace, be the jug for your
water, the hug, the thing you are in. This equally carefully
so as not to pull you, not to lock you, not to move too
quickly risking rebound.
Rest, but with arrival. Like reaching a mountain top,
one then comes back down.

“NOW PLANE” REPORT / Katinka Bosse
(After Bob had. explained the holograph and had outlined
his hypothesis about the planes and the “Now” and
“Associative” planes, the memory planes and how they
interact, we tried to find a way of experiencing the shifts
that, according to the hypothesis, must continuously take
place in our conscious moments. As we concluded, anxiety
gets in the way of a free shifting; this is like the ‘searching’
in improvisation when one is constantly ‘looking for’
new ideas instead of letting loose and opening up to them.
Or like in piano playing as I experience it, when I’m so
anxious or even worried to remember the music that I
don’t trust my fingers and their kinesthetic memory to be
able to remember it all by themselves. So ‘Trust’ is important,
‘sitting back’ and relaxed awareness.)
When I went for it, I soon got into a state of mind that
had very childish characteristics, also a bit insane, acting
like people who don’t give a shit about how they might appear
to people. Like going mad, losing control, the body
would go into the most ‘funny’ positions, although I would
not experience them as funny’, but still some very remote
place in my ‘registrating’ awareness would be able to attach
the label ‘funny’ to it, by doing an immediate check
on my recognizing memory files. Things became really
unpredictable.
The possibility of choices got immense though the
moment had so much magic that I felt like a child investigating
its environment. This constant ‘surprise!’ feeling
was there and it felt very comfortable. It was new, every
single little sensation, sound, emotion, posture, was entirely
new, nothing to be compared with, so nothing to be afraid
of but also nothing to be preferred or disliked. There were
no expectations, no limits, nothing to care about, no ‘value’
for there were no categories for ‘good’ and ‘bad’. But
while this went on, in let’s say 90% of my conscious mind,
the 10% registering the process (for I still had a sense of
time passing by) was still able to put labels on the ‘happening’:
phrase it, recognize it, compare it, evaluate it.
When I felt this 10% get less and less, and the ‘madness’
get more and more, I got frightened of what might happen
if I went right into it, if I would lose my mind, and I
stopped.


---------------

Kinetic Awareness

by Frances Becker


Introduction
I came to Kinetic Awareness
through curiosity and frustration.
Throughout my years of dancing (ballet
since the age of 6), fundamental questions
about the body and its functioning
emerged, but were never answered
to my satisfaction. I never got a real
answer to: How do my muscles work
when I do a plie, or: How can I relax
my shoulders? Why do they get stuck?
"Pull up" did not make any sense to
me. Or even "release"—How could I
release?
When I came to New York from
Cape Town, South Africa, I followed an
historical dance trail. First I studied
Graham, Cunningham, and Erick Hawkins
techniques, then Ideokinesis and
Contact Improvisation. Finally I landed
on the floor in Elaine Summers's loft
on 537 Broadway. There, in a room
filled with people lying on blankets
apparently doing nothing much, I finally
found some profound answers to my
questions. Elaine gave me the guidance,
but also the opportunity, time,
environment, and the "tools" to find
out the answers I needed. Her work,
Kinetic Awareness, allowed me to trust
that my body knows how to move and
how to take care of itself.
The roots of the philosophy of
Kinetic Awareness go back to Elsa
Gindler who worked in Germany in
the 1930s. About the time of the Second
World War her students brought
her work to America where Elaine got
to know it through Carola Speads,
whose work, Physical Reeducation,
emphasizes breathing and movement.
(Her book, The ABCs of Breathing, is an
invaluable resource.)

Confronted with osteo-arthritis and
faring the possibility of an end to her
dance career, Elaine chose the path of
self-healing. The inspiration of
Speads's work plus months of intense
self-observation, led Elaine to create
Kinetic Awareness, a system that identifies
areas of excess tension in the
body.
In Kinetic Awareness, through
simple movements, done with the assistance
of a hollow rubber ball, excess
tension is released and better mobility,
control, and coordination results. The
system can also be used for the prevention
of injuries and for reducing psychological
stress.
As a dancer and choreographer of
the Judson Church Group in the 1960s,
Elaine participated in the examination
and incorporation of everyday movement
into the dance vocabulary, and
was involved in the intense discussion
among the choreographers about approaches
to dance technique. Dance
colleagues Trisha Brown, Meredith
Monk, and David Gordon, and musicians
such as Pauline Oliveros, studied
KA with her at that time. Since then,
dancers Eiko and Koma, Dana Reitz,
Merian Soto, Patti Bradshaw, among
others, plus many singers, actors, and
people from all walks of life have benefited
from her work.

What is Kinetic Awareness?
*
Kinetic Awareness is a system of
bodywork in which all parts of the
body are encouraged to be free to
move in all of the directions in which
iPs possible for them to move. All the
systems are important: the skeletal,
muscular, circulatory, digestive, nervous,
etc.
Our cells have intelligence. If we
take the time to listen to them, they can
be trusted to respond. We have many
levels of awareness /intelligence: Intellect,
Emotion, Visual mind, Kinetic
mind, Verbal mind, Auditory, etc.
Kinetic Awareness is the awakening of
the Kinetic Mind, and its liberation
from the excessive control over it by
the intellect and the emotions, so that
the body is better able to work harmoniously
with the other levels of intelligence,
not against them
The work is experiential, based on
the students' own observations. Anatomy
is taught and pictures of the body
studied, to awaken the students' internal
vision of their own body. A student
may look at a picture of a pelvis
for years before really "feeling" and
"seeing" their own pelvis. In my own
teaching, I also encourage drawing
with the non-dominant hand to uncover
unconscious images and clarify body
awareness.
The first level of work is done on
the floor, lying on hollow rubber balls.
The ball isolates the sensation of the
individual parts from the rest of the
body, allowing the student to experience
each body part separately. The
balls are also a psychological aid to
increase concentration and provide a
point of focus. Because of the roundness
of the balls, movement in many
directions is possible. And, of course,
they massage the muscles as well.
A goal of KA is to free the body so
that it is always moving away from pain
and towards pleasure, hopefully doing
this without our having to "think"
about it, and without our inhibiting it.
The work is divided into five
phases:

1. The student becomes aware of
each body part and is able to articulate
every part of the body on its own
through slow concentrated movements
with as little tension as possible, as
slowly as possible, with or without the
use of the balls.
2. The student is able to move
more than one body part at a time and
integrate many movements simultaneously.
Allover body systems such as
breathing and circulation are explored.
3. The student is able to change the
level of tension, or "electricity," from
very low, to very high tension, at will.
4. The student is able to vary their
speed of movement from very slow to
extremely fast.
5. The student is able to do all the
previous levels—articulate each part of
the body, breathe freely, manipulate
tension and speed, move through space
and relate to others.

A central theme in this system is
the understanding of tension as a positive
and necessary part of movement.
Tension, or "electricity," is understood
as the energy necessary to move the
body. It becomes negative only when
it is held unconsciously, which we call
"frozen tension." Somebody with apparently
incorrect posture who moves,
may be better off than somebody with
"perfect" posture who tries to hold
their posture with excessive tension.
KA is a complete body therapy in that
it takes students through release and
reintroduces them to the use of tension.
(However, many people are so delighted
by the joys of ball release that they
choose to stay at that level.)
Part of the success of the work is its
understanding of the psychological
aspects of physical holding patterns.
Wilhelm Reich called this psychological/
physiological phenomenon "muscle
armoring." When frozen tension starts
to release, hidden memories and associated
emotions may also be released.
Often the tension patterns are related
to very early childhood, a preverbal
stage, when purely physical responses
such as crying, tantrums, and expressions
of joy may have been inhibited.
As the student of KA begins releasing
some of this "muscle armoring," they
often spontaneously remember and
have dreams of early childhood events.
In KA, while working physically
with any part of the body, one may be
confronted by emotions that have been
locked away for many years. Thus the
student often embarks on a deep journey
of self-exploration and self-integration.
This takes courage. Students are
invited to share their feelings and emotions
during the work and later in
group discussions. Importantly, the
defenses of the individual are allowed
to remain in place until they are ready
to be released. Because there is no
interference by others (the student has
control over the ball and can stop
whenever necessary) the student is able
to journey at his/her own pace, until
the inner circumstance for change is
right.
In many ways this work is hardest
for dancers. They have invested hours,
months, years, in studying and moulding
themselves into specific techniques,
and sorting out the endless theories of
turnout and breathing. They may have
ignored the body's essential system of
pain and pleasure and not realized the
high degree of tension they hold unnecessarily.
Unfortunately it is often
an injury that forces them to reconsider
these habitual movement patterns.
Kinetic Awareness as a Dance
Technique and Creative Tool
In 1981 Elaine invited me to participate
in her Kinetic Awareness dance
class. It was a three-hour class starting
with ball work on the floor, going
through all the elements of basic dance
technique, and ending in wild and
wonderful dancing. We explored extremely
slow and very fast movement,
movement memory and repetition,
stretches, balance and momentum,
shape, speed, tension, all improvised,
allowing us to come to grips with our
own limitations and physical givens.
We practiced basic movement building
blocks like plies, extensions, elevations,
but we could choose the specific kind
we wanted to do (plit first position or
second, grand or demi, etc.). This technique
class became a place where one
could really reconsider and improve,
practice, vent frustrations, find new
movement, notice patterns and preferences,
and solve problems. It was also
a class to discover one's strong desire
to dance. A nursery for the incubation
of new ideas.
The last section of the class was
spent on performing and, most importantly,
observing each other. Most
illuminating to me was Elaine's interest
in all kinds of bodies and their individual
abilities. We learned to appreciate
what each person could achieve when
they considered their physical abilities
as gifts and not as liabilities.
This class inspired me to continue
exploring Kinetic Awareness in dance,
applying it to dance training and choreography.
Because of the dynamic nature of
the technique (one is always moving)
and because of its emphasis on selfexploration
(physical and emotional),
Kinetic Awareness is an excellent creative
tool. As soon as movement and
emotions start to flow, ideas come
forward. Students are encouraged
early on to take the work and make it
their own, finding ways to tailor it to
their own individual needs and integrate
it into their own ongoing work.
KA practitioners have used this work
for voice, acting, writing, dance, other
bodywork, helping people overcome
incest, etc.

As a choreographer and improvisor
I am interested in spontaneous movement
and am searching for structures
to make the subtleties of authentic
movement visible. I feel that the study
of improvisation is like the study of
chaos, there is some order there but
where? I am committed to dancing
from the inside out and communicating
this with my audience.
I am also interested in true virtuosity,
when a dancer goes beyond his/
her own limits. When the body has
found freedom of movement, it moves
through spectacular positions, forms,
and rhythms. Giving way to momentum
allows the body to take risks that
if we "thought about them" we would
consider impossible. I enjoy the moments
in performance when I, as the
performer, am surprised by what my
body can do.
I am interested in working with
dancers as dynamic and creative individuals
who don't hold back their
creative problem-solving but give everything
to the creative process and
feel a part of it. Using KA, I train
dancers to improvise and be able to
make kinetic decisions that are informed
by their intellect, their sensations,
and their emotions. The honesty
of this highly aware state is transmitted
to anyone watching, whether in a class
or a performance. Very often, after
performances done by dancers trained
in KA, the audience responds physically,
not with words—instead of telling
me what they responded to, an audience
member will actually do the movement.
Their bodies directly experience
and retain the kinetic communication.
I see performance as an exchange
of energy, and Kinetic Awareness has
given me a language with which to
explore this communication. For example:
Do you send your energy out, or
do you pull an audience's attention in?
How is your awareness communicated
through the face, and especially the
eyes?

The experiential language of KA
ranges from the slow, detailed listening
to one's own sensations and experiences
in the ball work; to exercises where
one learns to play with tension/elec-
tricity/energy and be able to direct it
anywhere in the body; to work with
vision, exploring different ways of
using the eyes/focus while moving; to
work with the alignment of the knee
joint and as part of our spring and
shock-absorbing system; to periods of
time just "letting the body stretch itself,"
where one learns to allow the
kinetic mind to move the body without
interference from the intellectual mind,
finding the body's own desire to move
and following that. Beyond any of the
specific vocabulary, KA is simply the
cultivation of kinetic awareness—in any
moment of moving and being. Everyone
uses the language differently.
To be able to learn all these things
one needs extended study time. So, in
1990, in New York City, dancer friend
Nina Martin and I -started the New
York Dance Intensive, a year-long
training program in which we offer
traditional dance, KA, contact improvisation,
and developmental movement
side by side. The emphasis is on integration
and the realization that if we
take care of our bodies, our creative
egos will blossom as well. Often we
feel as though we are really teaching
creative thinking and the ability to
consider problems from many perspectives.
The Intensive is an opportunity
to be challenged from many viewpoints
at the same time.
My choreographic work is, like the
Intensive, highly idealistic. I try to get
people to work from a place of deep
attention and physical/emotional honesty.
I believe I walk a fine line between
therapy and dance but this edge
is rich and full of excitement.
Just as Elaine's classes were truly
democratic, empowering people to
discover and work from their own
bodily experiences, this way of working
has challenged me to open my
creative self to dancers and challenge
them to share their creativity with me.
Kinetic Awareness is not a style. It
is not a specific form of movement.
Rather, it is an experiential vocabulary
that I use to open an individual to their
own style or sense of individuality. In
KA, the philosophy is supported by the
physical technique, which is based on
the way our neuro-muscular-skeletal
system is structurally designed to function.
This leads to an efficient use of
the body while developing its strength
and dynamic movement possibilities.
The challenge I give myself as a choreographer/
teacher is to train dancers to
be unafraid of using their imaginations
and creativity while giving them the
structures within which they can use
their talents.
A dancer without a deep understanding
of his/her kinetic mind,
whose kinetic mind is not connected to
the intellect and the emotions is, to me,
not a fully trained dancer. All the
pirouettes in the world, all the spectacular
physical feats cannot impress me
as much as a simple movement that
originates from a deep feeling of alive-
ness and understanding of the miracle
of the human body.


KINETIC AWARENESS AND CONTACT IMPROVISATION

Kinetic Awareness and Contact
Improvisation connect in a helpful and
logical manner that is beneficial to the
beginning dancer as well as the more
practiced one. Over the years, Contact
dancers have sought out and studied
many different forms of release work
and bodywork to enhance their perceptions
and dancing. Among these are
Body-Mind Centering, Authentic Movement,
Klein Technique, Release techniques,
Alexander Technique, and
Kinetic Awareness. I would like to
communicate my experience linking the
practices of Kinetic Awareness and
Contact Improvisation.
I began teaching Contact Improvisation
in 1977 in New York City and
from the beginning was intimidated by
the breadth of knowledge that students
needed to have in order to take the form
to its most demanding and sophisticated
levels. When I began to study Contact,
as a former gymnast and diver I already
had an appreciation of spherical space
and a great deal of control of my weight
in terms of coordinating with outside
bodies. But many of my students came
from a more “normal” background
where they operated most comfortably
moving upright and in a forward direction,
with a lack of nuance in the control
of their mass while moving into the
floor and other bodies. I often thought
that it might be a good idea for them to
practice on an inanimate object as I did
in my sports (uneven parallel bars,
trampoline, free fall in diving) in order
to refine their spatial orientation and
weight-giving skills rather than learning
from the start on another human being.
This experiment became possible
through the practice of Kinetic Awareness,
which many of my students have
studied for the past five years with
Frances Becker.
In 1986 Frances and I wanted to
extend our dance work into coteaching.
We also felt that, historically, our generation
wouldn’t be the ones to create
new forms, but rather that through
juxtaposing the many different movement
forms and practices that have
emerged over the last two decades, new
perceptions of dance training and performance
could be found. We began to
coteach a class that combined Kinetic
Awareness and Contact Improvisation
and were excited by the process and the
dancing.
In Kinetic Awareness one learns
about one’s body through a tactile relationship
with a rubber ball, from which
it is a logical progression to work with
a complex human body. One benefit of
this coteaching is that students seem to
be less injurious to themselves and
others after doing the ball work, because
in KA they have a lot of time to
observe their habits and patterns while
moving on their own. They learn to
release unnecessary muscle tension
while actively moving, without the added
complications of hyperactivity, nervousness,
and adrenaline rushes that
can happen with the physical intimacy
of Contact.
Teaching beginners Contact after or
while they’re studying Kinetic Awareness
makes my job immeasurably easier.
With the experience of KA, students
come to Contact having already begun
the process of learning to pay attention
through the body, letting the mind observe
while being actively engaged with
the ball. 1 can then devote myself to
teaching the complex interactions of the
duet form that are the heart of Contact
Improvisation.
We continued developing this collaborative
class in New York in private
studio workshops and at the Laban
Institute and Movement Research and
were able to put our theories to the test
over the long term at the Experimental
Theater Wing at New York University
where the students could study the work
over the course of a whole year. From
there we felt that what we really needed
was our own training program and so,
in 1990, we started the New York Dance
Intensive.

Nina Martin



KINETIC AWARENESS NECK EXERCISE 

by Elaine Summers

If you move every part of your body all the ways it can move without pain, often, at any time during the day,
your body will become three-dimensionally centered, the tonicity of your musculature will be balanced, strong, and flexible.
Our bodies love to move. Movement is necessary to our whole sense of well being, confidence, and joy. It is amazing
how delicious the movement feels when you are focusing on and moving only one part of your body, very slowly, listening
and paying attention to your self. Feelings of comfort, fluid, flowing energy and a general sense of well being and delight
can be felt, knowing that your body is being well taken care of by you and that you are gaining an understanding of your
complex, marvelous, interrelating systems.
The purpose of moving slowly is to give yourself a chance to listen and understand what your body is experiencing
and how it can move in as many ways as possible with as little tension as possible, without pain. It also gives you a chance
to observe the way your body works without imposing value judgements, just observing "how does my neck move, what
does it feel/sense as it moves?"
Ideally your body should be able to move in all the directions natural to that particular part of your body, feeling the
movement as pleasant. The movement itself increases your articulation and extends your flexibility. Most of our life from
infancy onward we are taught to move as quickly as possible, without much thought about appropriate tension patterns or
alignment. If we are lucky, we have time during infancy to learn by trying out and experimenting with our body. Gradually
our parents’ or guardians' expectations, desires, and requirements may come to supercede or suppress our own feelings
and sometimes even the development of our natural kinetic/physical intelligence. By concentrating, by listening, allowing
our proprioceptive system to talk to us, we can realize and enjoy the ordinary wonders of our individual mind/body/spirit and
our own special gifts.

GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS TO KEEP IN MIND

Choose a place in which you feel comfortable, safe, and warm: where you will not be interrupted.
Choose a firm, flat, horizontal surface to lie on, perhaps a wooden floor, or a firm bed.
Remember that tension is the way we use our energy to move every part of ourselves. Tension is wonderful. Tension
is our movement power. You can not move without energy/tension.
While working with one part of your body, you can rest other parts in passive, healing positions. For example, while
working with your neck, support your legs with pillows, so that your knees are bent. This is very good for your lower back.
You may wish to also place a pillow under your ankles, or just rest your lower legs on a chair, couch, or cushion, or extend
your legs vertically, resting your feet against the wall.
Each body part is independent and can initiate its own movement, in this case the neck. The head can follow the
movement of the neck as it will.
In order to discover what articulations and movement abilities are natural to your neck, it is a good idea to begin
exploring movement possibilities without the use of the balls. From any position, just by moving your neck gently in all the
directions it can go, very slowly, you will discover where areas of pain or discomfort may be. Pain is often caused by frozen
tension, neuro-muscular asymmetry, or an injury resulting in limitations to your coordination and freedom of movement.
Pain is one of the most important ways that our body talks to us: it is essential that you do not make yourself
move through pain. If you discover that a movement causes pain, move away from the pain, and continue moving by
trying to approach the area from another direction; gradually the movement and your concentration will help that injured part
become well, and you will know it because the movement and the body part will no longer be painful.


NECK EXERCISE — First Phase
The First Phase of Kinetic Awareness is articulating all possible pain-free movements of a body
part, through slow concentrated movements.
You may choose to work without any rubber balls, lying down, sitting in a chair, or standing, or with
a 5’ or 6 ' rubber ball. (Plastic balls are fine, but I prefer the feeling of the rubber surface and its
response.) Place the bail dose to you, so that when you are ready to work with it, you will not have
to change your resting position.

1. Lie down on your back. vour egs rnay be extended, or your knees may be supported by pillows.
2. Allow yourself a few minutes to let every part of your body melt and be supported. Consider
what you are feeling at this moment. Try to let your body/mind/spirit totally relax. Notice the parts of
your body that are holding unnecessary tension. Do not wait for perfection.
Let your neck rest in center. Center is the place where you do not have to do anything, where
your neck can just be. Is your neck experiencing pleasure, discomfort, or pain? Does it feel flexible
or tight?
3. If you are working with the balls; place a 5" or 6" ball under the base of your skull [photo 3].
Allow your head to rest comfortably on the ball. If at any time during the action you feel insecure or
that your head may roll off the ball, place it more comfortably.
4. When you sense that you are ready, let your neck turn very slowly to one side (allowing your
head to follow) [photo 4], concentrating on all the changes that you are experiencing. For
example, notice the way gravity affects your eyes, lips, tongue, jaw, hair; the distance between your
ear and your shoulder; the lengthening, shortening, or holding of your muscles on one side or the other.
Do you need the amount of tension you are using? Maybe you are sending irrelevant tension to your
jaw or eyebrows or toes? Can you release the unnecessary tension? By moving slowly you give
yourself a chance to become aware of the state your neck is in now and perhaps of what your neck
has experienced in your life.
If you discover pain, do not push through the pain. Pause, move down or up, exploring ways
to continue. Try to find a way to continue the movement that is pain-free. If that is not possible, return
to center, as slowly as possible.
When you have moved your neck as far to one side as possible, wait, take a deep easy breath,
exhale, and wait, perhaps it will go a little further on its own.
5. Return to center. Come back as slowly as possible, observing any differences that you may
feel. You are now moving away from gravity. Is it more difficult? Are you using more tension? What
do you notice, experience?
6. Turn your neck slowly to the other side as far as it will go [photo 6], always observing what
your neck is feeling, never pushing through or keeping your neck in a painful position. What are other
parts of your body, including your emotions, experiencing? When you have gone as far to that side as
possible, take a deep breath, exhale, and wait fora moment to see if your neck would like to go a little
further.
7. Return slowly to center again, observing any changes that you feel. Take a deep breath,
exhale, and wait a moment, as perhaps you are able to let your neck just be in center.
8. Extend the front of your neck as far as possible, arching so that your head is resting evenly
on the floor somewhere on your skull [photo 8]. Again take a deep breath, exhale, and wait a
moment to give your throat a chance to, maybe, extend a little further.
9. Return to center as slowly as possible, noticing all the differences that may be taking place.
Maybe it will be easier coming back or more difficult. Observe whatever is happening. Try to use only
the amount of tension your neck needs for the movement.
10. Stretch the back of your neck, elongating the back of your neck, especially the area at the
base of your skull [photo 10]. As you do this, your chin will come closer to your chest in a relaxed
way. Try not to direct your energy to tensing and closing the front of your throat. Take a deep breath
and exhale. How does your breath feel about this position?
11. Return to center giving yourself a chance to observe the way you have released the tension that
was necessary to stretch the back of your neck. How do you feel about releasing the tension? Take
a deep breath and exhale.
If you have been working with the ball, gently take It away and allow your head to rest on
the floor. What is your neck feeling? How is the rest of your body responding?
12. Lie quietly considering all that your body has communicated to you. Which of the movements
did you enjoy most? Were there any movements that you disliked, that felt uncomfortable, perhaps
surprised or pleased you? Give all levels of your perception some time to ask questions. Of course
all of our history is known to our unconscious and with encouragement it may choose to make itself
known to our conscious mind; sometimes you may wish to take written or audiotaped notes.
13. This action can be repeated changing the position of the ball. There are three or four places
that you can position the ball to support your neck: (1) the base of your neck; (2) just below your skull;
(3) the middle of your neck; (4) the base of the neck, almost the top of your shoulders.



---------------------------

WHO MADE THESE DANCES? Two Solos: Some Strange Pleasure and She is a Canyon

by Elizabeth Witham

Now I think that I don’t “make” dances anymore. They bubble up
spontaneously from my cells, my unconscious. More often than not
these dances “make” me. Make me, show me, bring me to see things
differently.
Jan 1989. Standing at the bus stop across the street from the Boston Food Co-op in
Allston. Observing my mind’s wanderings and associations. My mind says to me, “Do I
derive some strange pleasure from becoming anxious inside?” What the hey?! Where’s this
coming from? I grab a piece of scrap paper and scribble, trying to keep up with the liquid,
elusive, thought words. Feels like channeling. I don’t know who or what. Try not to figure
it out, trust it, let it come... Back home I edit, arrange, and eventually speak the words
through a microphone onto cassette:
Does this give me some strange pleasure to become anxious inside? Does this
enable me to feel my existence more acutely? Do I thrive? Do I take some strange
pleasure so that I can feel important like I am getting something, going somewhere?
I build a crisis into my life—I fabricate a crisis out of what is simply living. I
judge my every step, analyze my every move, in order to regulate, in order to know
that I am. Do I test myself constantly in order to know that I am? Do I derive
some strange pleasure from testing myself? Leaving any semblance of security or
stability—leaving it all in order to risk some strange pleasure like I am getting in
the pit of my gut...
Mar 1990. Riding the Red Line train to teach morning Contact class at First Congregational
Church in Harvard Square. Another something coming through. When I get there I ask
the students to begin warming up while I write furiously for nearly ten minutes, to capture this
before it slides away again. “She is restrained, she is restraint. You have to drag what she
needs from her with skyhooks...”
Mar 1991. Practicing Authentic Movement at Studio 440, Union Square, Somerville with
Jeanie Minuchin witnessing. In costume—full length/long sleeved/turtle necked/fake leopard
skin/stretch nylon dress, grass green gloves. How does she want to move me? Quaking
flapping shimmering shiver shift balance long reaching toe. “She attracts change. She
worships change. Her restlessness, she wears it like a medallion...”

Apr 1991. She is a Canyon performed at Mobius in Boston, in a group concert produced
by Scott deLahunta. During feedback one audience member says he feels afraid of her. Yes,
I tell him, yes—me, too. Others adore her—yes, me, too! She is making herself known, my
body her vehicle. And of course I am her, also! Surprise!
Aug 1991. Practicing Authentic Movement at Studio 440 with Jeanie Minuchin witnessing.
Wall and floor my partners in a delicious contact trio. So much pleasure in moving—some
strange pleasure. Ah, I remember writing/speaking that text. Could this be the movement?
I begin to risk feeling the full potential. Do I take some strange pleasure as /
fabricate a crisis—my every step—my every move—constantly in order—testing
security—leaving stability—in order to risk feeling anxious in the pit of my gut—
some strange pleasure—so that / know that I am my ability to regulate my existence
more—being felt more—does this give me more, of what I can feel?
Nov 1991. Invited back to perform She is a Canyon at the Mobius “Art Rages” fund-raiser
concert. Each time out, “She” takes me to a new place, fills in another gap.
Feb/Mar 1991. Moving to words of Some Strange Pleasure, practicing Authentic
Movement at The Dance Complex in Central Square, Cambridge, with Sarah Hickler
witnessing. Up against a wall and Sarah says to me, “What if you were moving up against
the mirrors?” Yes! Reflected self—reflecting Self—self-reflections—reflected—reflecting on
self-reflection!
Apr 1992. First showing of Some Strange Pleasure in faculty concert at The Dance
Complex. I am wearing baggy rayon print pants, a white no-sleeve blouse, white socks and
black hard sole shoes—a real character. I am cold. I put on my jacket. Rose colored with
wide lapels. Someone gives me a rose. I put it in my lapel. I go onstage and zoom!
Do / thrive? Am I anxious? Do I analyze? Asking the questions—leaving any
semblance of security in order to risk feeling something. Do I judge? Do I seem to
get something? Information about my existence—as I fabricate a crisis out of what
is simply living. Does this give me something to feel more acutely—this crisis, this
risk of feeling the full potential? Does this anxious feeling in the pit of my gut—
move in order—test constantly—asking the questions—so that I can feel?
June 1992. Shared concert at Mobius with Sarah Hickler (DIG: Dance Theatre
Excavations June 3-5). Performed Some Strange Pleasure some more. This dance is putting
me in touch with the clown inside. Thank you! Thank you! Thank you!
My own anxious feeling—my every move—in order—to find information about what
is—simply living—asking the questions about how I experience my acutely—my own
ability—risking—feeling—the full potential—of my own—strange—pleasure.
Jan 1993. Encouraged by a postcard from NSS and hoping to reconnect with the larger
improvisation and performance community I am sending these photos and texts and this
chronology of solo dance evolution. So. Tell me. Who made these dances? 



She is a Canyon (1991)


text and solo by Elizabeth Witham
She is restrained. She is restraint.
You have to drag what she needs from her with skyhooks.
She isn’t about to tell you she might be that vulnerable.
She is a snake. She wears teeth around her neck.
She breathes smoke and fire and venom. She is a snake.
She is inconsistent. She will not stay where you put her. Don’t try it!
If you put her on the mantle she will slip down into the fireplace and dirty herself with ash.
If you put her into the ash she will dust herself off and climb to the mantle.
She will not do what you think. Don’t count on anything.
She will not be there except when you need her most or when you least expect it
She is a canyon. She is a misunderstanding.
She is an orphan, a mother, a child. She has no morals.
She has no humanity. She is a holy orifice, a holy order.
She will leave you far behind. She will forsake you.
She will love you. With all her heart and might.
She is a tree, a mountain, a mountain lion.
She needs you desperately and she will not tell you until it is too late.
She is whiplash. She is flawless. She has scars on her heart.
She won’t take you with her, she has too much already.
She holds herself tight. She won’t let go until you do.
When she feels herself falling she doesn’t try to stop.
Each time she falls that much further.
She loves. She hates. She waits. For nothing. For everything.
She wants it all and cannot rest. Her restlessness, she wears it like a medallion.
She attracts change. She worships change.
She will not be held down.
But for goodness sake hold her tight or she won’t know you want her.
She changes and she is so constant. In her understanding.
Let her be now. She is more power than you can be with. She is too much.
She is too many women at once. She is a six armed demon with bedroom eyes.
She has no humility. She is your sister, your dearest friend.
She will never abandon you. She will always leave you.
She is a rock. She is a sun. She is a tear in your eye. She is motion with direction. She is a leaf off a tree. A warm leg against yours.
Straight.
Flying.
She is a canyon.
Be watchful.
You might fall.
In.

----------------------------

Still Moving

by Many

We’ve excerpted some “comments!
suggestions!ideas for CQ” (that we received)
from the “Contacts Checklist”
questionnaire, sent to new and renewing
‘Contacts’. Your comments and suggestions
are most welcome too; please send
them directly to us at CQ. We appreciate
your feedback. [Eds.]
Publish Newsletter separately with
listings of Contacts, Jams, Workshops in
simple inexpensive way four times a
year. Would like to see more on teaching.
Dan Gottesman, Burlington, VT
I would like to see a permanent section
in the magazine dedicated to “new
ideas” for teaching (exercises, processes,
etc.), people talking about their classes
and how they work. Broader focus on
the class preparation and ideas! Also,
possibly a focus (updated) on Contact
companies around the world and how
they work.
Jeffrey Thornton, Albuquerque, NM
Sometimes I yearn, in my dancing isolation,
for some ideas about how to begin
creating dance community.
Erica Wheeler, Victoria, B.C.
Maybe a profile on various teachers’
philosophies on Contact today, or profiles
of practitioners, and applications
outside Contact itself.
Scott Cunningham, Madison, WI
Anything ever been done with the
Breakthrough Dancing folks, integrating
psychological issues and co-counseling
with Contact work? I’d like to see that.
Also various teaching issues like
“should I/how can I/how much to teach
lifts when some of my students are so
obviously earthbound?” Seems to me

their “issues” need to be worked on/re-
solved before “graduating” and yet they
are clamoring for the teaching and I
then think maybe it’s a bootstrap thing
and it’ll click in somehow? But some
of them are a little lift-oriented (like orgasm-oriented
sex y’know?) and I’d
prefer to push through the rolling issues
and the weight giving issues (like, how
can you be lifted if you can’t lie on
someone?). That’s my biggest Contact
question these days.
We don’t talk about difficulties
much—even as simple as sharing ideas
for how to deal with that New Age
starry-eyed woman who insists on talking
her way through class about the
“universal energy flow” or what can I
do when (inevitably) my students burst
out crying in the middle of class? I
already have a good sense but it would
be good to do some group thinking
about it. When to grin and bear it and
take it as part of the improv and when
to respond/interfere if ever?
Actually this materializes more
clearly as: When I’m teaching contact,
is there a conflict between students’
trying to work out their psychological
issues in class and my trying to facilitate
their learning of the physical skills
like rolls or falls?? Make sense?'
Lori Shollenberger, Baltimore, MD
So let’s start a new column in “Still
Moving” on Teaching Chops: exercises,
concepts, scores, and methods you’ve
invented, adapted, and/or particularly
find interesting!useful. Short one-item
entries are perfectly acceptable. Who
will start? Send to us at CQ. [Eds.]



------------------

The First Dance

by Emery Blackwell and Brigitte Jagg


These writings were taken
from the 1992 Breitenbush Jam
Journal. The first story was told
by Emery Blackwell, a dancer
with cerebral palsy, to Nancy
Stark Smith. The next entry in
the journal was a response from
Emery’s blindfolded partner,
Brigitte Jagg, a dancer from
Germany, as told to Mary
Herzog.

EMERY’S STORY:
I felt it at the “all-nighter” event
at the 1992 Breitenbush Jam. I was
in the room with one person. I was
really relaxed into the music and the
other person was blindfolded. It was
about 3 am and she had been dancing
all night really hard. She was really
into herself.
I went over to her real slow,
pushing along in my manual wheelchair.
I touched her with my foot. I
felt she didn’t know who it was.
After awhile she made more contact
and figured out who I was. I could
tell she was very nervous, ’cause she
was shaking. .
We danced for awhile; she was
moving around my chair and I
moved with her, and after awhile we
got closer and she got really nervous.
I invited her to come up onto my lap
on the chair and she went real slow.
I felt her hesitating but she was open.
She got up on my lap and I took it
real slow, pushing the wheelchair
with my feet and holding her in a
position that felt safe for both of us.
She wasn’t afraid but I still felt she
was nervous. She still had the blindfold
on. It took a lot of trust.
At some point, she started making
different shapes on me and the
chair. Every once in awhile I’d say,
“I got you. Don’t worry, you’re
safe.” She was going up higher and
higher til she had her feet on my lap
and stood up real slow, real tall.
Real tall. She was shaking—she still
had her blindfold on. I had her real
safe and felt safe with her. At that
point, whatever nervousness she had
in her melted away and we kept
dancing.
Later, she asked me for some
water and I took her on the chair
outside the studio and found some
water on the counter and guided her
to it. She was so relieved when she
got the water; since we left the studio
on the chair with her still blindfolded,
I had all the power. I felt it was
big for her. Real big.
One more time it reminded me
that I was not disabled.
And then we went back into the
studio and danced for another hour.
How was this first dance different
than other first dances?
I was completely relaxed, like
rubber. We were alone in the room.
I remember the separate events. She
was blindfolded. Because all the
factors were so exaggerated it showed
so clearly the transformation that
happens.
What transforms and why? Is the
physical safety a major factor?
I think it’s more the mental safety
and some physical. To be with their
fears of all sides of disability. To
feel and synchronize with my life,
and how to find themselves in that,
and to feel our common ground, that
we’re the same.
This experience has increased my
ability to recognize other people’s
reality when they’re dancing with me
for the first time.
I remember the song that was
playing when we first made contact.
I think it was called “Come Sail
Away With Me.” I can’t believe the
luck and the coincidence of that
song. At the time, I never thought
what it meant.
BRIGITTE’S STORY:
It was, for me, the most important
contact dance I ever did, because
I lost completely the feeling of time.
That was great. We danced for two
hours and I didn’t realize it
I was blindfolded and knew I was
alone in the room and my body was
tired, but the energy was flowing.
Suddenly, I heard wheels on the floor
and I touched a foot
I was so curious. And I was nervous.
I’d never danced with disabled
people before, and I didn’t know
what was possible to do in a wheelchair.
I moved really slow, which I
never do. I am a quick mover and
often skip over points that are really
important. This time I was slow and
I could feel so much.
It was great that all my senses
were so open because I was blindfolded
and after a short time I knew I
could completely trust this man. It
became so easy for me to play with
him and his wheelchair. It was so
much fun. It was so exciting when I
stood up on his legs and when I was
upside down and he rolled through
the room at a high speed, or so it
felt.
After I had some water, we went
into the studio again and Emery’s
music tape was playing. I liked very
much to dance to his tape. I could
feel that he was singing the music in
a way. He sang the music with his
voice, with his body. And I was
really happy that I had my first dance
with him blindfolded, because that
way I could really become close
without fear.
He really had power when he
gave me the water. I asked if it was
really water or something else. I was
joking. I trusted him completely. I
realized that he could give me something
else, but I trusted him.
At the end when I opened my
eyes, the light was so much that it
hurt a little. And I looked in Emery’s
face and that moment made me
happy.
Later, I couldn’t stop moving
when I was lying in my bed. I am
glad that this dance happened. I will
take it into my life.


--------------------


VOICES OF THE SKIN

Voices of the skin
Speaking to sighted muscles
Touching the breath
Wheelchair, an outgrown chrysalis
Fear, a layer left behind.
Twisted arms thrust aloft in triumph
Limp legs blossom with a tiny point
of the toes.
Conversations held in the
Language of movement
No need to tell the blind man where
to turn
For he is the one drawing the line
In the center of the road.
No need to point to letters on a
plexiglass chart
At which the spastic boy stares
flames
So someone can hear him.
For he is heard and understood.
No need to hold open the door.
It will stay open by itself.
For we stand on common ground
One beside the other
The other, within.
The only rule of syntax is trust
Not the common notion of
Trusting that the other will not hurt
the self
Rather, trust that each self will
At all times
Care for its own
The mute speak the
Language of contact.

by Nancy Meltzoff


-----------------

FROM CAMARGO TO CONTACT

by Leonard Pitt

In the 1730s, prima ballerina
Marie Camargo caused a scandal in the
ballet world by shortening her floor
length dress to just above the ankles.
Why the rash move? Because she had
just invented the entrechats quatre and
wanted everyone to see her hard-won
virtuosity.
Camargo’s quick jumps in the air
were a radical departure for the ballet—a
new orientation towards the
conquest of space, away from the older
choreography emphasizing the dancer’s
horizontal movement across the floor.
For the next hundred years, the history
of dance can be seen as an ascending
curve lifting the dancer higher and
higher into the air. This unrelenting
drive to get the body off the ground
finally reached its culmination at the
Paris Opera in March 1832 with the
premiere of La Sylphide, starring prima
ballerina, Marie Taglioni. Audiences
were stunned by Taglioni’s feathery
lightness and gliding leaps where she
appeared to come down only when she
wanted to. The illusion of flight at last.
This raises the question: why the
urge to get off the ground? Could the
ballet have just as easily developed an
aesthetic that emphasized the body’s
connection to the ground as it is, say, in
the dance of Japan or Indonesia? Was
it an accident that the dance went up?
I don’t think so. Dance forms are not
random creations springing out of a
cultural vacuum, but rather are fed and
shaped by a whole set of social and
cultural forces.

Camargo’s entrechats quatre were
an important contribution to a dance
form that was in perfect keeping with
the thought of the period. In a similar
way, Contact Improvisation is a perfect
expression of our own time. Let’s look
first at the ballet and its historical context.
By the 1700s the established Church
had spent over a thousand years perfecting
the duality of spirit and matter.
Nature was viewed with contempt, a
world of corruption and decay, the
abode of the devil. God and his retinue
of angels resided high above in the
heavens, separate from nature. Salvation
depended on denial of the body. In
1981 the church was still trying to drive
home this message when Pope John
Paul II said that “the shame people feel
about their sexual organs helps them
maintain holiness and honor.”
God, the father, is above; mother
nature is below. Implicit in this hierarchy
of values is a rampant misogyny
that took on its most grotesque form
during the European witch hunts which
lasted, at their most feverish pitch, a full
two hundred years. At a time when
biological process itself was sinful, one
of the most common accusations leveled
against suspected witches was their indulgence
in sex, eating, and dancing—
physical acts that the inquisitors distorted
beyond all proportion. The sex was
orgiastic, eating was gluttonous, the
dancing was hysterical.
Later in the 17th century, just as the
witch hunts were dying out, modem
science was on the rise with its new
twist on the cultural attitudes towards
nature and women, namely that nature,
personified as female, was to be feared
and ultimately controlled. Francis Bacon,
one of the architects of the new
mechanical philosophy, stated that its
purpose was to establish “The Dominion
of Man over the Universe... to bind her
to your service and make her your
slave.” Bacon’s methodology for discovering
the “secrets still locked in
Nature’s bosom” was to “conquer and
subdue her, to shake her to her foundations...
to storm and occupy her castles
and strongholds.”
The scientist Robert Boyle looked
upon nature as a “pregnant automaton”
and deplored the “veneration, wherewith
men are imbued for nature,” for it has
“been a discouraging impediment of
man over the inferior creatures of God”
John Evelyn commended Boyle for his
“inquisition” of “stubborn matter” from
which he was able to gain “a confession
of all that lay in her most intimate recesses.”
These men and others with similar
views exerted a seminal influence on the
development of the Scientific Revolution.
Nature was subjected to the cold
shower of rationalism and came out
newly conceived—Nature as Machine.
The astronomer, Kepler, viewed the
world as a huge clockwork, a “celestial
machine.” Ren6 Descartes described a
world “composed like a machine of
matter.” The human body and all of its
functions were reduced to the mechanical
action of pumps, pulleys, and
weights. The flight of dance from corporeality
and the cultural need to gain
distance from nature were two aspects
of the same historical trend.
It is significant that the formative
stages of the ballet took place in the
court of Louis XIV and that Louis wore
high-heeled shoes. High heels, in fact,
were part of the ballet costume right up
to Camargo’s time. Already the body
was being coaxed off the ground, reshaping
the posture in a subtle preparation
for toe dancing.
In the illusion of overcoming gravity,
the ballet confirmed the new science’s
premise of man’s separation from
nature. In its rejection of weight, mass,
friction and three dimensions, the ballet
was the perfect Christian dance—an
abdication of the flesh. The ascension
of the ballet was in perfect keeping with
its time.
Now let’s shoot forward to America
in the late 1950s. As 17th century
Europe was aching to get off the
ground, mid-20th century American
youth were fighting just as hard to get
back on it.
Superficially everything appeared so
smooth in the 1950s. Automatic transmissions
were introduced and Dynaflow
became a way of life. The purr of the
automobile was accompanied in song by
the velvet tones of the Four Freshmen.
On TV, Ozzie and Harriet and Father
Knows Best were telling us everything
was alright. Just below the surface,
though, things were percolating.
What do Elvis Presley, the hula
hoop, and Chubby Checker’s Twist have
in common? The lower body, specifically
the hips. Within the space of a
few short years these things hit America
like a tidal wave. Elvis the Pelvis
awoke a flood of dormant hormones and
sent young girls writhing and screaming.
The terrified TV censors lopped off
Elvis’s offending lower regions and
only showed him from the waist up.
Life Magazine called the Twist an
epidemic, a “hip-swinging mania,” and
compared it to the dancing madness of
the Middle Ages. And the hula hoop.
This wasn’t a toy, it was a phenomenon.
At the height of its popularity Wham-O
Corporation was manufacturing twenty
thousand hoops a day and couldn’t keep
up with the demand. Suddenly millions
of children around America were practicing
one of the most elemental movements
of humankind, a rhythmic
swinging of the hips. Here was a social
revolution waiting to happen.
At the same time, there was Limbo
dancing, surfing, and skateboarding—
more ways for kids to think down.
Most bizarre of all was a fad on Midwestern
college campuses in 1959
known as “hunkerin’”—a slang update
of squatting on the ground. Life Magazine
ran a story on the new craze with
photos of smiling students squatting on
roof tops, in chairs, on pianos, in front
of the TV.
Mainstream America’s reaction of
outrage to Rock ’n’ Roll repeated an
earlier eruption in the 1900s when white
America felt the shock of Ragtime
music coming out of the African-Ameri-
can community and was never the same
again. The measured rhythms of the
Polka, Galop, and the Waltz were
shoved into the background as ballrooms
across the country hopped to the
faster rhythms of the Fox Trot, Bunny
Hug, Grizzly Bear, Lame Duck and
Chicken Scratch. Once again in the
1950s, African-American culture, the
most marginalized segment of American
society, was injecting American youth
with the pulsating rhythms of Rock ’n’
Roll, and in the process unraveling
some of the most basic precepts of
Judeo-Christianity.
What was happening in America?
Was there a thread tying all these things
together? America’s center of gravity
was dropping fast, from the head to the
pelvis, and, sociologically, this was a
keg of dynamite with a short fuse. A
radically new physical reality necessarily
brings with it a new world view.
Parents had no idea that as they encouraged
their children with hula hoops and
watched them dance the Twist, little
social rebels were in the making. Only
a few years later these same kids were
inventing the sexual revolution, experimenting
with drugs, constructing the
ecology movement, protesting the Vietnam
war, and exploring Eastern religions.
If an historical context gives an idea
of why the ballet went up, why then
were we suddenly plunging back down
to the earth? The only reasonable assumption
is because we were too out of
balance. There was a message transmitted
throughout American culture in the
’50s and ’60s. Be it the physical fitness
craze, natural foods, somatic-based
therapies, Earth Shoes, low riding tricycles,
futons, or water beds, the message
was the same: find the earth. The women’s
movement and the renewed interest
in the ancient Goddess cultures are also
a part of this social history.
And what about Contact Improvisation?
As the classical ballet expressed
an urge to dissociate from nature, Contact
reflects this deep cultural need to
reconnect with the natural world. Nurtured
by Rock ’n’ Roll, hula hoops, lava
lamps, and marijuana, Contact turns the
classical Western dance tradition inside
out. The classical ballet focuses on up
and out—‘up’, literally, and ‘out’, pre-
sentationally. Contact, on the other
hand, rejects the “show” and drives our
attention back to the most basic elements
of a body in motion. Weight,
gravity, contact, and friction become the
“stars” of what is in essence a performance
of the body as nature. Years ago
Contact would have been formally censored
as a form of Satanism, the dancers
branded social outcasts. Today it stands
as a sign, one of many, indicating a direction
to follow for our very survival.
