----------------

Editor note 1996 

Moving fast has always been one of my passions.
As a child, I would race with my sister to see who could
get their pajamas on first. As a Contact Improvisor, I've
been a reflex junkie, a momentum freak; loving to feel the
adrenalin rush, test and take to the turbulent waters with a
partner, seeking our limits: of body, mind, and communication.
Speed can be irresistible to me. I like to think fast,
talk fast, and enjoy the challenge of racing to meet the
force of a speeding volleyball in exactly the right spot at
the perfect angle with the exact power to send it where I
want it to go. Thrilling, funny, fun.
Dancing in the speed of my reflexes, disciplining myself
to stay open in the midst of intensity, ready, available
for information and for action, makes me feel alive—and
the kinship with fellow movers, with whom I am sharing
these magical milliseconds of reflex and response, grows
easily intimate. They can “hear” my weight shift in that
last moment of falling, feel just what force is necessary to
balance the kooky flow of my weight, suggesting through a
tiny shift of their touch a solution to our movement puzzle,
a next chapter to our story. Through touch and movement,
we love, cherish, challenge, and rail on each other as long
as it lasts. This continues to be a great part of my pleasure
in dancing.
But passions change. Mine were changed, or rather
forced open, by a broken heart. A simple heartbreak, as
they go, but for me, total. I had suffered disappointments
before, but this time I let the wild beast have me. Exhilarating,
raw, intense. The heat burned through my body like
lava, travelling out in thin hot lines under my skin, out
through my limbs, down into and through my core. Something
was happening to me. An initiation of sorts.
The heat made me move differently. Cut my speed, and
created a new intensity. It was slow, delicate, deep. This
molten lava moved almost imperceptibly, directing me to
open the way for its passage through my body. Turn this
way, extend your arm, release weight into left hip, twist to
the right, open eyes and stretch focus to that comer of the
window sill. After awhile, the organization of limbs and
tensions would be complete and there would be no more
desire to move. Just to stay. Inside the position, energy
raged, flew, circulated thoughout my shape, energizing and
soothing me, both at a stillpoint and the peak of fire. Sooner
or later, this inner circulation would come to rest, and the
impulse to move would return... The heat and heart of this
dance created a new movement practice for me. One that
nearly always makes me weep, it’s so painful and sweet.
Sometime during the making of this issue, I realized
that I’d been hoping that the issue itself would be sexy.
That simply by holding it, looking through it, you’d begin
to feel warm, like you were moving inside. It’s a feisty
issue, fit for CQ’s 20th anniversary.

by Nancy Stark Smith

----------------

A DANCE OF IDENTITY
by Ishmael Houston-Jones

notes on the "Politics of Dancing"
 first used the Politics of Dancing form in 1986 as a
rehearsal tool while working on Adolfo und Maria, a
piece with a large multiethnic cast, which dealt with the
complicity of the artist in the racism and fascism of their
governments. I needed to get fourteen people to really look
at and work with one another.
Earlier that year I had had a conversation with Liz
Lerman about art/political work she was doing in
Washington, D.C. She described a performance there in
which each audience member was given three cards representing
the categories of sex, race and sexual orientation.
Depending upon their responses to questions placing them
inside or outside American dominant culture, they would
receive either black or white cards. Since the classification
for this performance assumed male Caucasian heterosexuals
to be the dominants in our society, straight white men would
receive three white cards while black lesbians would receive
three black ones. Those who had some dominant traits but
not all would get two of one color and one of the other. My
memory of what Liz described was that the audience was
then seated in four sections of the hall based upon how many
white cards they had—three, two, one or none. With Liz’s
description of this performance still vivid in my memory, I
began rehearsals.
I wanted something more multifaceted that would
address the more elusive ways in which people perceive others
and make assumptions about what those perceptions
might mean. I wanted to explore some of the subtle and
some not so subtle ways people act upon those perceptions
and assumptions. I also wanted people to feel what it was
like to be in a minority facing a much larger group. I was
interested to know which groupings caused people discomfort
and which ways they liked to be grouped, when they
would lie or resist the categorizing. I wanted to break down
knee-jerk responses and for people to look beyond the superficial
things they were seeing and find the origins of the
responses they were having.
THE FORM as it first existed: In Adolfo und Maria, I set
up the image of a troupe of minstrels performing in the
cabarets of pre-WWII Germany. The entire cast was in black
face, and as in the tradition of both minstrel shows and
cabaret, they performed skits of topical political satire. The
main show was a burlesque about the German choreographer
Mary Wigman and her connection to Hitler, which culminated
in her choreographing the opening ceremony of the
1936 Olympics for him.
I gathered the cast in a large clump in the center of the
room, standing very near one another. I explained that we
were standing on a railroad track and a train was approaching.
I instructed that if you were a “MAN” you should go to
one wall and form a group with the other men. If you were
“NOT A MAN” you should go to the opposite wall and
group with the others who were not men.
What was key at this moment and, as it turned out, most
difficult, was that I wanted each group (the “MEN” and the
“NOT MEN”) to look at the members of their own group
first and not back at the “others.” I asked them to look for
similarities and differences, to check themselves for expectations,
assumptions, and surprises regarding the others with
whom, by this one factor alone, they had been grouped.
Since this was the first division, I allowed this phase of
inward looking at one’s own group to take a longish amount
of time.
At a certain point I instructed the two groups to turn outward
as a unit and to face and see the other group across the
room. To see them as a mass, and as individuals. To look for
the same things (differences, commonalities, etc.) as they
had while looking inward.
After a while, I had the two groups merge in the center
of the room and divided them a different way:
BLOND—NOT BLOND
HOMOSEXUAL—NOT HOMOSEXUAL
BOTH PARENTS LIVING—AT LEAST ONE PARENT
DEAD
Besides having people go through the observations of a new
grouping, I now asked them to notice how each grouping felt
compared to the ones that came before. Did one feel differently
being one of eleven “RIGHT-HANDED” people
looking across at three “LEFTIES” than one felt being one
“ASIAN” woman looking across at thirteen “NON-
ASIANS”? If so, in what way? The form allowed no talking,
only noting your observations and emotional responses
to them. We spent about forty-five minutes splitting apart,
regrouping, then splitting apart again. We spent almost as
much time afterwards discussing what it all could mean.
OVER THE YEARS, I've led the Politics of Dancing in
various contexts: at workshops at U.S. colleges and
European dance schools, at The Contact Teachers
Conference in Berlin in 1988, as a rehearsal tool for other
performance projects. I've heard that others who have done
the form with me have gone on to lead it in workshops of
their own.
I've continued to develop the form to try to deepen the
possible meanings derived from doing it. The first major
change was that I felt that I should no longer be the only one
choosing the categories. I'd always felt manipulative and in
a sense voyeuristic, eliciting personal information from the
groups. I decided to give the first five or so instructions and
then invite another participant to continue for five, and then
they would turn the asking role to someone else. This almost
inevitably led to a sort of round robin group free association
of people randomly asking us to divide ourselves. I feel this
is much more democratic and gets to the core of what the
concerns of the entire group are.
I've further refined the role of the asker by instructing
that each of us should think of a categorization that would
place us in the majority (but not include everyone), one that
would place us in the extreme minority, and one that would
split the group in equal parts. While this last adjustment took
away some of the randomness of letting anyone split the
group whenever they felt an impulse to do so, (often in
response to the previous division), it added focus to the
choices made by the participants and clarified the reasons for
doing the exercise.
Another change I made from those first rehearsals was
that I merged the Politics of Dancing with work I had begun
doing with improvisation with eyes closed. In the eyes-
closed work, I try to get people to stop being handicapped by
their vision, relying upon the information they get from
vision to the impediment of the other senses. I had the group
form with eyes closed so that the only clues to the identity of
the others around us came through touch, smell, temperature,
etc. I then asked that the person making the category begin
their statement using the words “I” or “MY” and that the
statement had to be true for her/him. If the statement, e.g.,
“I AM AN ONLY CHILD” or “MY EYES ARE BROWN,”
was true for a person, they were instructed to stay in the center
of the room with the person who spoke; if it was not true,
they were told to travel to the wall with eyes closed and form
a group there. People were instructed to open their eyes only
after they had formed an inward-oriented group. Then they
opened their eyes and continued as before, always with a discussion
afterwards.
SOME THOUGHTS about the Politics of Dancing exercise,
its usefulness and some possible pitfalls as a tool for
pinpointing identity and prejudice:
In its original form as a rehearsal tool for a specific
piece with a large cast, it was a good and fast way to get this
disparate group of people to work together and deal with the
personally sensitive material of the piece. Some of the more
dramatic separations were used in the performance of Adolfo
und Maria. For example, an ensemble dance was interrupted
by a loud sound and the “WHITE” performers were separated
from the “NOT WHITE” performers; then the piece
continued.
From the start, I observed a tendency for some people to
situate themselves somewhere between the railroad tracks
and the wall, waffling in the middle, not fully committing
themselves to either category. Early on, I felt I had to
address this because, for the exercise to be most powerful,
people needed to commit themselves in the moment to being
“THIS” or “NOT THIS,” and to experience being looked at
as “the other.” As I explained to a student who was having
trouble with a division: when the secret police were knocking
on doors during the Third Reich they were not so interested
in the subtle grays of identity. Also, by not choosing at
the moment of questioning, you are possibly denying a component
of your identity, and you should examine why it is
that you cannot declare this trait to be a part of who you are.
At its worst, the Politics of Dancing can become a kind
of glib party game where people try to get the embarrassing
“goods” on their friends. This seems to happen most often
when the participants are all young (late teens, early twenties),
and have known each other in some other more formal
context over time. This has happened when I've taught
workshops as a guest teacher within a college dance department
and in my improv class at the American Dance
Festival. I think I could have avoided this rowdiness and
lack of serious focus by giving a more thoughtful preamble;
perhaps explaining Liz Lerman’s description of the piece in
D.C. as a source of the work. Putting the exercise in a context
seems to be a necessary responsibility of the workshop
leader. This means being clear why you think this particular
group of people would benefit from doing it, and not just
throwing it in as a kind of interesting workshop activity.
I believe that this form can deepen one’s sense of identity
in several ways. It forces one to publicly declare aspects
of the self that are taken for granted or are not often acknowledged
(perhaps even to oneself). Also one gets the experience
of being looked at as one of a group of people who...
“DO NOT WANT TO HAVE CHILDREN,” or “HAVE
BEEN ARRESTED,” or “HAVE PARENTS WHO ARE
COLLEGE GRADS.” While, for myself, I have had no
qualms with being grouped with other “NON-WHITES” or
“NON-HETEROSEXUALS,” I usually am uneasy being
grouped with “MEN” and I feel exposed being looked at
with the group of “PEOPLE WITH DEAD FATHERS.” I
have found that I usually derive a certain comfort being in
the extreme minority whereas others find this to be unsettling.
The most vexing statement has been “I BELIEVE
THAT I AM IN THE MORE INTELLIGENT HALF OF
THIS WORKSHOP.” People have left the room or insisted
upon being “hit by the train” based upon their feelings about
that one. In one rehearsal with eight men, seven went to the
side of “MORE INTELLIGENT” while only one declared
himself to belong in the “NOT MORE INTELLIGENT”
half. The statements “I CONSIDER MYSELF TALL” or “I
THINK THAT I AM OVERWEIGHT” often produce two
groups that look identical in terms of height and weight.
Personal perceptions can be deceiving.
ANECDOTES: I often relate an experience I had in the
early ’80s while doing a lecture-dem at Elders Share the
Arts, a seniors art center in the Bronx. I began teaching the
workshop using the voice of a nanny talking to very young
children. I asked in a completely condescending tone, “If
you can, could you try to lift your arms above your head.”
Of course, this being a senior center with its own performing
arts group, filled with vital, creative people who just happened
to be over 65, they all immediately thrust their arms in
the air giving me very quizzical looks. The point being that
in my life in the downtown porno [postmodern] dance world,
I rarely came into direct contact with “older” people and my
concept of “PEOPLE OVER 65” was that they were all virtual
cripples who needed to have even very simple things
painstakingly explained to them.
When leading this form at the EDDC (European Dance
Development Center) in Holland, the workshop of twelve
was made up of about six Germans. When someone said “I
AM NOT GERMAN,” we split accordingly. When we
opened our eyes to focus in on our own group, one of our
“NOT GERMANS” said to a man standing with us, “Hey,
you belong over there.” He responded that he didn’t because
he was Austrian, and a rather heated discussion broke out.
Once, at the discussion after having done Politics of
Dancing at a college in the U.S., one student was very upset
because her best friend had gone to the “JEWISH” group.
Her friend explained that one of her parents was Jewish, so
in that moment she felt that to be true to her identity she had
to go to that side. The friend continued to be agitated, all the
while insisting that she felt neutral about Jews and
Jewishness. Someone asked if she would feel the same way
if she had just discovered that her best friend was “BORN IN
CANADA” or a “METHODIST.”
Defining sexuality takes quite a bit of finessing. In a
single workshop “I AM GAY,” “I AM HOMOSEXUAL,” “I
AM QUEER,” “I HAVE INTERCOURSE ONLY WITH
PEOPLE OF MY OWN GENDER” and their “opposites”
can each produce very different splits in the group. A person
who can stand with “I AM HETEROSEXUAL” may find it
impossible to do so with “I HAVE SEX ONLY WITH PEOPLE
OF THE OPPOSITE GENDER” or, even simply, “I AM
STRAIGHT.” It seems that the politics of gender and identity
and language has produced an infinitely complex dance.

---------------------

PLEASURE REPORT

by Christina Svane, K.J. Holmes, Zjamal Xanitha, David Hurwith

Last February, David Hurwith,
K.J. Holmes, and Zjamal Xanitha
asked me to lead some sessions of
“Moving Words” while they happened
to be in Holland—David teaching in
Amsterdam, K.J. in Arnhem, and Zjamal
back in town from San Francisco.
Moved by the request of these three
wonderful dancers, teachers, and soul-
stirrers, I agreed to lumber out of my
semi-hibernation of focusing on my
four-year-old and ten-month-old
daughters, into the dark wet depths of
the Dutch winter for four Friday
nights.
The following writings are from
our first night together, which started
low and ended high. Walking into the
studio, we found not the quiet sanctuary
for the senses we all needed, but a
traffic jam of various music honking
through the walls and booming up
through the floor. Stuffing socks into
the holes around the heating pipes, I
put on Miles Davis’s instant landscape,
Sketches of Spain, and took
stock of our collective condition. We
were a mess. K.J. was wrung out after
the train ride from Arnhem and an
intense week of teaching; David had
been teaching while sick, was now getting
over the flu, but not over his broken
heart; Zjamal was fasting and in
need of rest; I was feeling thick and
stiff—more like a tree than a person—
still not really dancing since the birth
of my second daughter. For a few
painful minutes, I stared at that wall
that appears when I feel the situation
calls for something new, and I don’t
know what it is. When I’m lucky,
there’s a door in that wall. This night,
the Pleasure Report answered the bell.
The structure is simple. While
one partner lies on the floor, eyes
closed, the other touches or moves
them with the intention of creating
pleasure. The receiver meanwhile
applies the intention of experiencing
pleasure, and memorizes the images in
which pleasure appears, so they can
write them down when it’s over. But
the simplicity turns out, as it so often
does, to be a challenge: keeping it simple
is not easy. On this and subsequent
occasions, I discovered that in
the touching, doing less gives more.
Keeping the touch in one place and
letting it deepen works better than
shifting locations on the body several
times. Repetition works better than
variety. I found these things to be true
for me, and the reports seemed to corroborate
that. I think the reason for
this is that when a touch is still, or
repeated, the receiver has the opportunity
to shift from perception to contemplation—the
source of surprise and
delight can shift from outside to
inside. As the toucher, one has to
maintain faith that the pleasure is
unfolding of its own accord in the
receiver; and realize you are not actually
the pleasure-giver, but the focus-
puller for your partner’s pleasure-lens.
Twenty minutes observing your
pleasure are followed by twenty minutes
reporting it. The task is to report
on the pleasure—not the actions performed—and
to capture that pleasure
in the writing itself. It is an exercise in
total subjectivity, in observing how
you construct pleasure for yourself.
What fascinated me in hearing
these four texts, was how different the
ingredients for pleasure were for each
of us. Since we were programmed to
experience pleasure, our reports necessarily
revealed some of our personal
requirements for constructing it. But
even more interesting to me was the
discovery that despite all the differences,
the importance of place was
central to all of the texts. And they all
seem to be or arrive somewhere, or
both: Zjamal’s at the Welsh fair selling
potions; David’s in a Jewish temple;
mine in a family of spheres in space;
K.J.’s in a chain of characters that also
lead to a significant place, a la “this is
the dog that chased the cat that chased
the rat that lived in the house that
Jack built.” It was curious to me that
these final locii should turn out to be
precisely where each of us is in our
lives: Zjamal is often on the road, like
a gypsy, teaching earth-magic workshops;
David has come to view his
work as “physical prayer”; I am trying
to grow into the mother’s role of being
the sun for the orbiting spirits of my
two children; K.J. lives the life of the
successful dancer—always on the road,
longing for home.
Until I did this exercise, I thought
pleasure was an event. However,
through these writings I see that pleasure
is a place to be, a sacred place,
true home.

+++

[I applied a feather-light touch to Zjamal’s periphery. I drew
designs on her ankle and her hand with my index finger. I
pulled her for a ride by her arm in a waving path through the
physical space of the room. I lifted and lowered her hand
slowly, then arranged her hair, strand by strand. C.S.]
A cat licking with a rasping, rough tongue at my left
foot. Blowing air, little winds, the draught blowing thin
down a long corridor, cool linoleum underfoot.
Delicate patterning embroidering a Minoan sandal of
leather and gold, curling tendrils around my ankle.
My legs folding, wrapping the folds of the cloth about
my legs, images of Indian postcards, Shivablue joints folded
into a background sunset of burnished cliches.
Lifting my hand, my hand encrusted with pearls, the ,
embroidered seam edge pressing against the skin, skin powdered,
lips painted. My Elizabethan hand rising regal, slow,
lofty, ostentatious, complete in itself, my hand in its honour
is lifted—composed and decorated.
Pulling me, stretching the whole right side of my body,
elongating, luxuriating, compliant, yet resistant in the density,
the solidity of my weight, my pelvis earthed deep. Suddenly
shifting sliding very fast, the earth underneath is
whirring, it’s like bulldozers in the backyard, the earth turned
over pungent moist, revealing things—tree roots, worms,
stones, decomposed leaves and lumps I never imagined were
there... I remember looking out the window of our house in
Wellington at the fierceness and velocity of the earthmoving
machines transforming my playground in a violent eruption
of earth. Stillness.
She grabs big bunches of my hair...in the school photo
when I’m twelve years old, that huge tartan school tie clashing
with my green ribbons, my hair in two huge clusters
around my bewildered face.
She circles my hair twirling it on the surface of my face
like an array of specialist brushes, a short thick busy one for
this, a thin, etiolated, lengthy one for another purpose. I feel
her mischievousness. I am in her caravan. We are at a Welsh
fair, selling potions.

+++

A gathering of nothing, in primordial space, the substance only the idea of gathering, generates
warmth which spreads and fills itself up like a balloon, full of invisible content. Then
streaming outwards as the joyous wiggle of life, the left now right now serpentine rise of unfolding
bean shoots, racing spermatozoa, radio waves orgasming out into infinite sky—a strong
something carves its path, a path to define itself in, like the river bed of the twisting Nile, seen
from the window of a plane.
Honored to be a witness of this origin of livingness, I am amazed to watch it repeat this
dance a half dozen times, before discovering it had created not only life, but locii, places to be.
It, I, this, who? Now stops to circle and circle a spot, producing out of pure energy a ball of
something, the dust of friction, the stuff that burns in a star. And each thing thus made spins
with nothing to stop it, free to take up space, to begin and continue, and not be stopped! Like
a child looking over her shoulder expecting an admonishing glance, but finding nothing but the
unconditional invitation of space in all directions, I/this sphere, settles into my spin, claims its
velocity, and rests in perpetual motion.
Unforeseen delight springs up when the same process that coalesced me creates another,
slightly smaller sphere, which I find is also me, and yet another, and another, all of varying
weight/velocity, yet all are me, and I become the pulls, the recognizing, hinging circumferences
of bondedness, the family. I am the harmony of these spinning freedoms. The orbits, the gravities,
of nothing upon nothing, shining with non-permission, in pure astonishment.

Christina Svane


The hand laid upon me like a blanket, except that I’m not sure I have
felt that blanket. The hand swept upon me like a wave but I can’t remember
when I gave into a wave like that. It all started like most jokes, my left
arm flopped onto her foot and there we went. Lightness and acuity. Nothing
heavy here. No place to get too solid for what’s happening.
My thumb, My thumb. What has happened to my thumb? Boy,
you’re dumb.
That’s Now, this is then.
What’s Enough.
How would I know? What’s enough? When it’s good I want more.
Why wouldn’t I? Yet there is a pain that rides like a big monster under the
water of the ocean that is my chest.
Witty Body Work
Nibbling my numb plumbing
No nuance is meant to be savored here.
Get a grip! Let go of it.
How precious your problems were, but are they still? Plentiful? Juicy?
or are they past ripe; even rotten—more like dried, root structure—waiting
to be assimilated by the earth.
What does it mean to go to sleep? Is that enough? I like to follow the
story of this Sunday morning tour of my body in serialized, Saturday afternoon
movie, sequences.
Any in-between time created by my storytelling-to-myself apparatus.
Checking out on the present to weave myself a sweater-vest-like story of
this occasion.
Oh, ritual is created so that when we reappear on the scene (mentally),
we’ll know how many pages to skip in the prayer book.
Baruch Atah I’m wearing a suit. Elohainu Melech are the others better
than me. Boreh Pre—not yet—caught up in the habits of desire. Yehecke-
yanu Vekemanu I never want to have to stand up this long—Lazman Hazeh.

David Hurwith


Sketches of floors. Sketches of hearts. Sketches of broken windows and open
doors. Leading back to music. To music in my ear real close like you’re telling
only me: The air in Spain stands victorious.
Ablaze. The sun.
The remembrance of falling into one place for a long time. The endless possibility
of a long time. One place. My loft in Chinatown, music from all directions.
My pleasure, somehow, vast space between my eyes. My pleasure, not
pulling for more. Falling to falling to surrender to my images. Flags, banners
waving in the wind. Come on back. The twitch in your fingers, a small army,
the marching of colors up a hill. Some breeze. Some squeeze. One moment, a
line in the middle of my hand. Writing on water. Fish eat the words. Rhyming
under the surface. Deep tissue. Swallow.
Sift back to distant cloud. Smoke spiraling. I keep coming back, picking up
the time past. I really think it was miles of music. Miles. Music does that,
sends you right back. Or is it this later-night, winter-wood quiet? Muse is part
of music. Bring it to—(bring it, too)—some kind of voice at my feet. My soul
of my feet. Wings on my heels.
Meanwhile, back at the pleasure: Absorbing it all like a big hill of grassy
dirt in a light rain. Walking on me. Muffled drums. Trees, high notes, tug at
the strings of me. I will follow in my laziness. Appearance. Disappearance.
Like thoughts on back-stroke swim: Drink this river. Climb this hill, to where
those flags are still waving.
Okay, some flags waving on a hill. A banner flying, laundry on a line.
Words in a line, standing, waiting for change, for a bus to a vivid story. We
wave. We, waves, tossed, now here, now there.
The series: Day follows night.
followed by a dog
followed by a cat burglar
followed by a stampede of wild horses
followed by a casual fellow
followed by a cashmere sweater
by a dotted line
by a crazy loon
by a clock
with twenty seconds left...

K.J. Flolmes

---------------------

WHAT MOVED ME

by Jeff McMahon

by Jeff McMahon
We have many bodies we occupy,
hide behind, or willfully create. I have
gone through several. As an actor in
college in the mid-seventies, I found
myself grasping at the straw of character,
with no “body” of knowledge. I
struggled to create my body through
will and imagination alone. I did not
dance. My early contacts with dance
had been sporadic; seeing the Martha
Graham company or American Ballet
Theater on tour while in high school.
Mine was the soft-core experience of
an aesthetic supporter; the dance was
exciting, but my attention was more on
the dancers’ bodies as objects of lust.
The glossy color program I purchased
after the show felt like pornography.
In college, dancing provided a
posture for exiting the closet. Announcing
my sexuality seemed somewhat
presumptuous; I had very little
experience in which to ground such a
declaration, and did not want that inexperience
revealed. The language of
dance, created through action, grounded
my sexuality in the fluidity of movement.
I was not able to take this as far
as I fantasized. Like many gay men, I
found women liked my company, and
liked the way I danced. They knew as
well as I that our provocative dancing,
usually at the college-sponsored socials,
was not a prelude to sex (at least
between us). It was our way of translating
frustration and desire into style,
hoping other possible partners would
be able to read the signals through our
theatrical attempts at projecting heat
and hauteur, a kind of bathetic flamenco.
Through the Introduction to Modem
Dance class with Judy Masee (at
Reed College), I felt something beyond
the telegraphed ego of a “role” or sexual
display, a synthesis between body
and mind that my overinvested relationship
to language resisted. If art is
about opening new ports of trade within
our consciousness, then dance created
such an opening via my body. It
was a more direct and honest route to
emotional states than the manufactured
feelings my acting had relied upon. A
power struggle inevitably resulted, and
I abandoned theater (and college),
moving to Seattle to study Skinner Release
Technique with Joan Skinner and
her company.
With Joan, I discovered the depth
of the physical. We privilege what we
fear, or do not possess a deep understanding
of, and the body has always
been a repository of this conflict for
me. Battling the self-image of skinny
white boy, de-sexed through a homosexuality
that was more rehearsed than
performed, I found in dance an entree
into the world of flesh, where demarcation
^and desire were fluid. Her concept
of releasing opened up more than just
muscles for me. Joan’s work, poised
on the synapse between thought and
action, provided an imagistic, intelligent
access to the body; giving body to
thought on a pathway that ran both
ways. Her technique ran counter to the
tendency in modem dance to imitate
and elaborately mime significance and
feeling. We were to discover ourselves
through exploration, not display. It
was a perfect fit, the clothing I would
not have been able to select for myself.
I saw the Graham company again
during this time in Seattle. Martha was
dragged out for the final curtain in a
pose she could no longer sustain. This
denial of the aging body, an obsession
with physical perfection and frozen
beauty with its concomitant self-absorption,
had become repellant to me.
Having studied with Joan, this objectification
of the body as a tense and perfect
object of desire, which must resist
the gravity of real life and decay,
seemed pathetic. Dancers’ bodies are
not simply screens, coolly receiving
projected desires, but living things in a
state of flux. They move in opposition
to the marketplace, where movement is
a financial transaction, and sex commodified
to a sterile perfection.
I transferred this suspicion of
modem dance imagery to the imagery
of the urban gay male, where a bicep
could only be big and overdeveloped,
a penis could only be big and hard,
leaving the relationship between two
bodies limited by such rigid definitions.
As bodies became more “perfect,”
they often seemed to diminish
their expressive ability. Joan’s work
made the body more fluid, more subject
to change, with perfection an
evanescent state. Love is better served
in such a container.
As I released the grip on my body,
it developed a new language. Sexual
relationships were initiated through
dance, with partners in a class, rehearsal,
or dance club. Lovers appeared
in motion, our dance vocabulary
an attempt at Adrienne Rich’s “Dream
of a Common Language” as I interpreted
it then. Static, sitting on a stool, I
was sexless, but while dancing, I could
generate heat. This kinetization of desire
fit me better than the literalness of
the bars or sex clubs; I have a tendency
to overact and to play, as opposed to
be, a part. Dance allows me to do
both. Though the work of Joan’s company
tended to be cool and determined,
it was in this airy-yet-visceral space
that my body could expand. Unlike the
gay disco scene of the late-seventies,
whose steamy directness could make
me shrivel and recoil, the aesthetic cool
of postmodern dance gave me a safe
space in which sex could be nurtured
(my image of “safe sex” was far different
then). I could construct my own
erotic language, carved as much from
the space between two bodies as between
their points of contact.
I left Seattle in 1979, moving to
San Francisco to study with Mangrove,
a men’s contact improvisation collective.
My life in San Francisco was,
ironically, rather chaste (the relativity
of that term is significant). I spent my
time at Project Artaud and the Mission
district, not Castro or Polk Street. I
was looking for the skin that would fit
me, not a suit tailored for others. Mangrove,
a collective made up of mostly
heterosexual men, carried their sensuality
with the confident ease of self-identification.
I was embraced within their
exploration, but not objectified by it,
and the merging of my desires and my
hesitations found synthesis in their
body of work. I found my body opening
in a way that it would not in more
gay arenas. At that time in my life, ostensibly
heterosexual artists/teachers
seemed to give me more space than
openly gay cohorts, and “gay” was a
container wrapped around a lifestyle I
could not afford or was still afraid to
embrace. The cool space of experimental
dance gave me room to develop
my own vocabulary of intimacy
through movement, in a way that more
aggressively codified gay male interaction
appeared to preclude. San Francisco’s
sexual mythology lay heavy
around me, and I was not yet ready for
its display and triumph.
One of my college dance friends who,
older and more confident, had glided
back and forth over the borders of sexual
orientation with the same ease she
affected in dancing and shoplifting,
also moved to San Francisco. After a
day at the hotel restaurant I worked in,
I would meet her at the straight disco
she worked in. We danced there on her
nights off, or after her shift. Why was
I dancing in a heterosexual bar with a
homy (and now aggressively hetero)
cocktail waitress, in the nirvana of gay
San Francisco? My hands, arms, feet,
and legs were doing a wonderful and
idiosyncratic dance, sending complex
messages from the threshold of a new
identity. My crotch was still somewhat
in the closet, and my head in a book of
dreams buried between the legs of the
someone I had not yet become.
Contact Improvisation provided
many pathways; a moving point of
contact that was intimate yet less coded
(or was it just another set of codes?).
Moving my body in synthesis with another
body, new synapses were bridged
without, I thought, the leaden language
of sex grinding it into cliche. Dance
became an extended foreplay of hills
and valleys, in a rhythm different from
the determined march towards the summit
of orgasm. Contact has its own
logic, its own goals which shift with
each weight change. The decision to
pick someone up, either literally or
metaphorically, comes within a
process. (Contact duets with someone
who was “coming on” to me were an
exercise in clashing codes.) The antitheatricality
of Cl theory fit into a
Protestant/Calvinist urge inside me for
less show, more work. Perhaps it was
penance for the demonstrative drama
queen who also lived there.
I had come out politically and sexually
in Seattle, becoming an activist
during the Anita Bryant-led anti-gay
backlash, organizing an election campaign,
and speaking at the 1978 Gay
Pride Rally. In San Francisco, my po-
litical/sexual id perversely retreated. I
was not performing, and not yet blending
my aesthetics with my politics.
They were distinct, though complementary.
Gay dance and theater work
at that time tended toward “camp” or
obviousness (this is a generalization),
whereas aesthetically challenging work
did not usually foreground gay sexuality.
The youthful, out-there confidence
and assertion of Queer Art had not yet
arrived. If one listened, it could be
heard, shifting and growing, inside the
incubator which had hatched the older
sibling.
I recall with amused affection the
work of a young women’s collective,
Mostly Women Moving, who spun off
from the Mangrove axis. Their nascent
attempts at autobiography through the
vehicle of the body were rather soft
and discreet; far too many pieces beginning
with: “When I was a little girl,
I...” One of the women worked in a
live-sex emporium downtown, performing
hard-core scenarios for impatient
zip-fucks behind one-way glass: “I’m
so homy, I...” I longed for her to cross
the line, mixing material from one
script with the other, but that was not
to be. Lines were maintained.

After less than a year, I felt enclosed
in the claustrophobic demarcations
of San Francisco, and its liberation
was not liberating. I moved to NYC in
late 1979, needing new contexts for my
impatience. I was looking for a bigger,
brighter language to fit my wide-open
mouth. Performance Space 122 was
just beginning, and I got involved via
my friend Tim Miller, a founder of the
place. Open Movement, a weekly
event at PS. 122, became the new axis
around which my aesthetics and sex
life spun.
An early lover in my new city was
a Contact Improvisor whose work was
pushing aggressively at the edges of
that form. I began working with him
and a group of performers from
Philadelphia, creating a homoerotic
piece for five men called Three Men
Moving. The math was skewed, and so
were the relationships. There was an
overtness to the piece that made me uncomfortable,
even as I supported its injection
of sexual politics into dance.
The language of Contact was used as a
frame for desire and sexuality, overtly
sexualizing Contact’s formalism. The
sensuality of the work did not end at
the close of a rehearsal day, but spurted
into our personal lives. We exchanged
more than weight. This was not cool
modernism. Certain areas of the body
became highlighted, choreographed in
the stylized directness of modem dance
angst that I was so wary of; Martha
Graham visits The Ramrod. For me,
this showiness made it less truly sexy,
as if its aggressiveness pushed away
something softer and more subtle. I
have always been a romantic, writing a
poetic text on a shy body coaxed out of
the wings. Being so clear about “content”
seemed to risk a follow-spot vaude-
villian peddling snake oil. I preferred
more discreet lubricants in public.
That was fifteen years ago. My
work since that time has been as much
about text as movement, using the
screen of metaphor to dance into and
around issues such as sex, the body,
and my sense of identity in society. I
have preferred the indirect approach,
struggling with the need to both reveal
and yet remain mysterious; should the
dancer become the dance, should the
subject always be pointed to?
I am looking back at my moving
self, my body struggling to keep up
with my mind. I see the body catching
up now, the steady turtle overtaking the
easily distracted hare, who hangs back,
unsure of this power shift, calling
warnings and dire predictions. Slowly,
they have both adapted their strides,
hesitantly pulling each other along.
Both are afraid of decay, of age, of
traps and infection.
I think of the classic image of
Contactors, engaged in a mutual circling,
a cruising of the possibilities for
encounter. We all long for touch and
connection, discovering or developing
languages and techniques to make that
possible. Once contact is made, we believe
in it, while negotiating the risks,
hopefully with intelligence and awareness.
A point of contact is like a virus
being passed from body to body; adapting,
containing, and creating history
with every move, every point of entry.
It changes us as we carry it with us.
This is not “safe,” but moving things,
like memory, seldom are.


---------------------

CULTURAL GENITALS
by Paula Josa-Jones

journal notes on process and performance
M y first gender excursion happened in 1984 at the end of an intensive two-
week Delicious M ovem ent W orkshop deep in the Catskill M ountains w ith Eiko &
Koma. Each of us had spent the last day sitting near the river contem plating our
assignm ent-to bring together the image and m ovem ent elements we had been
exploring in a form that expressed som ething unique, a discovery, a realization, a
new identity o f some kind. I poured diligently over m y notes, seeking some clue.
As I ascended the steps to the barn, the evening's performances loom ing before me,
feeling foolishly lost, an impulse drew me back to the house, where I seized an old
tuxedo jacket o f Koma's. That evening, in an astonishing burst, m y first cross-
dressed solo, Tremble, was born.
I seek the heat o f m y sexual selves. There is a quality of m ystery and ram bunctiousness
that comes w ith m y experiences of crossing over. I am curious about the
perm eability o f m y sexual boundaries. W hat follow s are excerpts from m y journals
of process and perform ance from the past eleven years.

I
How do I dream the other? In an Authentic Movem ent session, I seize a blanket and
stuff it into m y pants, fashioning a gargantuan penis and testicles. I swagger w ith this huge
load in m y pants, feeling the power, the madness, the w eight of this stuff between m y legs.
I fall to the floor and pummel the earth w ith m y pelvis, scattering swam py seed everywhere,
driving m y cloth prick into the ground, grinding m y wadded sex deep and hard. I
feel exhilarated, wild, indomitable. Some tim e later, I remold the rag, and it becomes huge,
tumescent labia, hedges guarding the entrance to a cave, a place of blood and h u n g e r-
ravenous, fecund. Later still, it migrates to build buttocks, perched like snail's shells or huge
damp mushrooms behind me. I sit, perched high on the m ounds of m y ass, legs flow ing
apart like tw o giant rivers splitting at a watershed. Last, I build tw o breasts, which hang
before me like cod, leaking wetness everywhere. My journal recalls: 'Enorm ous swollen
vulva/testides. Vulvacles? A monster faun/fauna; an engorged, big-blooded, herm aphrodite.'
In the m onths that follow, various aspects of m y sexual anatom y form and reform ,
each incident bearing its own story, its own tastes, textures and necessities.

II
I have ordered a dildo from Eve's G arden-the model that looks the most like a real
penis. I am using it as a tem plate to fashion plaster penises-an experim ent for a new
piece. Unfortunately the 'head' does not allow me to detach the form from the m old, so I
end up using the less realistic model which comes in an unfortunate lavender. I w ant to
see w hat these penises will look like sticking out o f a pile o f dirt. Or harnessed onto the
several wom en in m y company. I want to see the wom en lying under a soft blanket of
black earth, w ith just these sepulchral white dildos sticking straight up, like icy stalks
sprung from odd pale bulbs in the chill of an early spring.
That image does not take hold, but I like the look and feel of the strap-on, and com bine it
w ith a suit, pants w ith an open fly, a fedora, a white half-mask, which I wear while sm oking
a cigarette. The character, sporting his white erection, stands on the dirt w ith a shovel,
digging, then resting with his hand on the handle, scanning the darkness, sm oking, cold
eyes glittering behind the mask. I seethe behind the mask, m y maleness like a thin stream
of mean acid in m y veins. As I saunter across the stage, leaving wafts of sm oke like dusty
footprints, I stalk the wom en onstage. I study them, shocked and fascinated by the vivid,
hot taste o f m y own avid male gaze, wrapped up safe w ithin the dark suit, the w orld held
at bay by the duet of m y dicks, the swollen white one below, and the sm oldering thin stick
o f the cigarette above. Over the months, I let him cook down, reduce to the stark bones
and inevitability of an essential sexual image, unnamed, unnamable. I am aware w ith this
being, as w ith earlier visitations, that to respond fully means to surrender, to be w illing to
be changed utterly, to relinquish knowing where we (he and I) are going.

III
We are shooting scenes for m y video-dance work, Branch, in a forest o f tali, thin white
pines planted in steep, tail rows, in footage which w ill later be edited into a hum id, dense
spill o f images which recalls the silent movies, I am a thin, violent man w ith a mustache in
a dark suit and bowler, sm oking and pacing abruptly, throw ing a white cloth at the cam era.
I am the same m an looking back over m y shoulder from behind a tree, w earing a
w hite chemise. I am a wom an running in white skirt and black boots, seen only from a
distance or in close-ups of her running feet. I am the man, w earing only pants, breasts visible,
mustache, long hair falling from the bowler. I am the white-clothed wom an, lying still
on the forest floor, viewed from a distance by the man.

IV
I am taking Diane Torr's 'D rag King' workshop in New York City. It takes place at
Annie Sprinkle's apartm ent, which is in fact several rooms composed entirely of sexual
paraphernalia: photographs everywhere of individuals wearing various sexual apparatuses,
an abundantly stocked sexual library, crystal dildos, sexual aphorisms pinned up w ith
little shiny dick-tacks, glitter, sequins, g-strings, pasties, and harnesses abound. The atm osphere
is playful, edgy, hot, like being transported to an exotic carn iva l-a darker, m ore
dangerous reality.

Each o f us has arrived w ith trepidations, our costume, and gauze and cotton penile prosthesis.
Our make-up artist is a trans-gendered, female-to-male pre-op S&M slave named Jimmy. S/he
transforms each o f us in turn, her make-up choices grow ing from the fusion o f w ho we present
and w hat s/he sees. I tingle with excitement. W ith my sparse, scruffy grow th o f beard, dark
slicked hair, and cheap jacket and tie, I become Raoul, an insolent character from the Lower
East Side. He speaks fast, blurred English, stained with a kind of m ongrel accent, and describes
him self as an entrepreneur. He is so slight and sallow, his ill-health and drug habit are
apparent.
Diane guides us through some stereotypically coarse male behaviors w hile walking, talking, eating,
sitting, looking. Don't smile. Handle your food like you have m ittens on. Leave the m ayonnaise
on your chin. Look directly. Don't smile. Take space. Sit and stand wide, unmovable.
Don't smile. There is an atmosphere o f barely controlled sexual energy and concealed violence
in the room, along with a foolish desire to grin, back off, get girlie. Later, when we all interact,
Raoul cajoles and threatens, alternately
ingratiating and sadistic. There is no question
in m y m ind that I am Raoul. 1 feel
charged w ith a kind of weird, stunted
power. I am enveloped in this persona,
and also eclipsed, frozen, unable to m ove
or act beyond him. His darkness is like a
drug to m e -l w ant to be bad, to be crazy.
We go out. Eleven wom en in virgin-drag
w alking in SoHo at night and no one is
fooled. I feel foolish, distracted, em barrassed
by our numbers and th e ineptitude
of our collective effort. I know I could pass
if I were alone. I w ant to pass because 1
am afraid I will be kille d -a woman treading
on the sacred ground of male dress,
male prerogative. I am fearful, and furious
that I feel so vulnerable. I am rem inded of
my own earlier 'drag ' role as a topless
dancer on the Times Square circuit during
the 70s. I realize that w hen I go out into
the world, I am always in drag. I feel disguised
as much as a female as a male, I
carry all of my sexual selves in my pocket.

V: The Messenger
I am in a store, looking at theatrical
make-up. On a whim , and w ith a rush of
excitement, I buy a beard and mustache. I
thin k I look like Christ, the w ay he was pictured
in the Sunday school room s of m y
M innesota Lutheran past. But I lack his
gentle inner smile, and instead, w hat curls
around m y m outh, behind and under its
roof o f 'real hum an hair,' is som ething sardonic,
fussy, and a little cruel. In another
store some m onths later, I find a black
coat, gorgeously gathered in the back, trailing
the floor, beautifully tailored in the
front. It hangs in m y closet like a desiccated
crow. Later I buy a top hat and ancient
umbrella. I assemble the pieces and begin
to dance. I look like one o f those enigm atic
gentlem en in the hazy, shadowed charcoal
drawings o f S eurat-hovering somewhere
in the background o f a 19th century
M editerranean village. M oving m y m outh,
hidden, sculpted by its fringe of fur, blasts
open a door to usher in a creature I don't
know. I play music by Diamanda Galas,
whose impossible, monstrous, excruciating
voice is the only sound I can find which
reflects the inner cacophony o f this being. We dance. We sit, hour after hour, in our mustache,
hat and coat, breathing the rage, the confusion, the insistence of this virile witch, this
inscrutable being.
Months pass, m oving from the impulses, the desires of this figure, follow ing his lead, letting
myself be guided, w a iting for messages. Sitting still as night, wrapped in the coat, m y
beard and mustache glued in place, tiny John Lennon glasses hiding m y eyes, breathing
him in and out, being breathed by him. The umbrella, open, then closed, its shape alternately
w om blike, then phallic. Beneath the coat now is a dress. A little black dress. The
man has a suitcase. Inside the suitcase are a pair of black Joan Crawford fuck-me pumps.
He takes o ff the coat, pulls up the leggings, dons the shoes. Diamanda screams, and this
new creature rips from her/his chair, hips thrusting, breasts flying.
W hen I wear him, I no longer know w ho is in drag. W ho is wearing whom ? W here am I?
W here is he, and w ho is she? Is she a she? We (he and I) go out. I am to appear at a
benefit for Mobius Artists Group in Boston, at their annual 'Art-Rages' party. As I w alk in, a
slight, elegant and darkly drawn figure from an earlier time, I startle the doorm an, w ho
tries to physically obstruct m y entry. Even in this context, I pose a threat, 1 am out of place,
a stranger. I have passed. I never thought about passing. I am him, I am burned up in his
presence, he has eaten me whole.
In the performance, HE begins, covered, unreadable. Then SHE bursts out, and finally,
there is the construct-the compromise, the impossible BOTH-the seams between them
gaping, painful.
VI
I turn slowly, catching m y reflection in a distant mirror. The suit is exquisitely tailored,
a m uted green gray which seems to catch and hold light. The front of the jacket is open,
and m y breasts move freely under the light silk of a ribbed camisole. I am wearing a small
dark mustache, and have darkened m y eyebrows, so that the contrast w ith m y platinum
hair is startling, other-worldly. My m ovement in this m om ent is light and taut. I feel
poised, birdlike (a night heron?) lifted w ithin a circle of sexual personae and possibilities.
Each m ovem ent, each sensation is a voluptuous m ix , a Escherian puzzle of male w ithin
female, fem ale w ithin male—a perceptual kaleidoscope. I move slowly, letting the com plexity
of m y m ovem ent accumulate, each gesture, pattern, a rendering from this shifting internal
landscape. I invite you to see me, to follow, anticipate, blend, separate. I let myself
become lost while the inner witness remains fully awake. I do not know where this jo u rney
is leading: how the inner life will transform, how the outer features w ill reflect, refract,
re-member the changes.

Epilogue
In playing the gender field, 1 am always w orking to deepen the images, to stretch
w hat I know, to dream out to my edges. I want to dive through the skin of gender cliches
into the turbulent waters of a wilder mystery. I think that to discover the possibilities of the
third sex requires a different kind of research. For me, improvisations based in Authentic
M ovem ent are a w ay to investigate. Conscious dreaming (asleep and awake), sitting still
w ith the images, not harvesting too quickly, not hastening to form, surrendering to the
power of the images, lingering with them, discovering when to wait, when to move, to
speak, listening deeply, cultivating an alert, unhurried, expansive inner vision freed from
the ego s need to shape a result, will open the field over time. W aking too soon brings
only a poor fragm ent of the dream to light. Time now for a longer hibernation, and a fearless
and keen listening to what calls from the dark, 

---------------------

ONE SHOE ON
by Susan Banyas

a love duet/performance text
One Shoe On has had a long life. Love travels in
time and space, in and through life and work; and so it goes that the characters of
Mona and Cody first appeared in a performance piece I did with Vincent Martinez
in 1979, called Chilly Weather. Life intervened. Love life. More theater. Then a
moment with a lover on the beach. Then more time, and this version of the Mona
and Cody story occurred. It takes time to understand the piercing energy of a
truthful moment. When the imagination becomes involved, the moment can open
up way beyond the ‘‘facts. ” Loving the material keeps the truth moving.
Mona gave me a voice, a way to be in the work. Cody is a composite character
whose voice comes from very specific conversations with very particular people.
Ah, the gift of fiction! Grace Paley says any story told twice is fiction. The Zuni
say there are no truths, only stories. Putting the memory fragments, the personal
idiosyncracies, the formal elements together any way I want to liberates my creative
impulse, opens up time. That’s why making theater is so much fun.
Writing helps me focus the story. Performing gives my writing voice and presence.
So this story was once a poem, once a short story. Then I tried it with two
dancers, contacters Carolyn Stuart and Patrick Gracewood with me as the story-
teller/mover. We worked with a movement score using gesture, focus, and very
specific blocking in space (the characters never touched until the end, when they
came together in a sensual and elegant dance to Dexter Gordon’s rendition of
“Tenderly”).
Later, I tried the piece as a monologue at a poetry cafe. Then I worked with
character actress and director Wendy Westerwelle to shape the character and find
the voice of Mona, and I tried it as a monologue again. More revisions. Sent it
out as a short story. Now I want to try it as a duet with a physical actor.
The point is, a script is a living dance score. A dance is a living script. I’ve
learned a lot from my Monas and Codys. My lovers have been my allies. As long
as I stay “in love, ” I’m in business.
My particular thanks for this story goes to Alan Ptashek, a dear friend from
whom I learned much about the dance. [S.B.]

“Cody, would you like to go to the beach?”
“What's this about, Mona?”
“I'm trying to understand things.”
“What things?”
“Who you are, why I miss you,” I thought. But I
said,“Cody, I have started seeing someone else, but
that's not why I can't live with you.”
“So why am I talking to you?”
“Let's go to the beach.”
“Why?”
“Because I want to see you. It might be healthy.”
“Mona, you know that picture of me in front of
my cab. I like that picture. Do you like it?”
“Yeah, Cody, I like that picture because you look
so sincere.”
“So stick it up on your refrigerator with one of
your arty little magnets, take a deep breath, open the
refrigerator, take out some raw vegetables and eat
them. Believe me, that would be healthier.”
With Cody I have to stay focused. “Can you go
on Thursday?”
“Yes.”
“I'll pick you up then.” I was relieved, nervous
and trying to sound upbeat. “About 10:30?”
“I said I could go, I didn't say I would go.”
This is what I go through. He's in neutral now,
playing with my head, but I'm a dancer, I'm flexible.
“Will you?”
There was a long, long pause. I knew Cody was
standing in his ratty kitchen. Here's a guy who says
he's descended from the Hungarian aristocracy and I
wonder why he has such a ratty kitchen. I wonder if
he's looking out the window at the alley full of kids
and yellow and pink houses crammed next to each
other. I wonder how he makes a decision, if there's
some emotional logic he's ploughing through or if he's
just waiting for the answer to appear from the bottom
of his own magic eight ball.
Finally he said, “Okay.” And the way he said it
sent me into a rush of feelings. But I caught my
breath, got my mind back in gear and took the offensive
position.
“Since I'm driving, Cody, would you mind packing
the picnic lunch.”
“You're really pushy, Mona.”
“O.K., we'll get take-out.”
I was always worried that things would get out of
balance with Cody. I was compulsive about equality.
Cody was a tight wad. He never offered to buy me a
drink, wouldn't fold my socks at the laundromat, didn't
give me enough time when we made love. It was
great making love with Cody. He was funny and
flashy and definitely had my curiosity piqued. But I
just wonder why he didn't take the time to fold my
socks when he knew I liked the ends folded together to
keep the pairs matched. Details and rhythms. That's
what sex is all about. You can't be busy or worried. If
you're keeping track, you miss those shiny moments
that see through you. Anyway sex is happening all the
time, like movement. Like how you feel walking down
the street, open and alive. Like how you look into
someone's eyes.
I was looking into Cody's dark brown eyes that
took me deep into time. And I remember him saying,
“Look at you. I bet you think you're pretty special
with your rhinestone necklace and painted nails. Pink
nails, Mona. You must want something.”
I smiled and wanted him in the biggest way. To
kiss me soft and long and tell me he would love me
forever and we'd sail to Shanghai, wear thick wool
sweaters past Greek islands, buy a house with a white
tile kitchen, catch the waves, sun in our faces. I wanted
it all. I wanted everything with him.
“I think you’re pretty special, Cody.”
“Yeh? Maybe. I play pretty good baseball. Did I
tell you I'm reading a book by Jim Bouten, an expose
into the world of baseball?”
“No kidding?” I leaned forward a little more and
kept going, “You know, I really like the way your head
sits on your neck.”
“Mmmm.” He did a head roll. “It curls better
that way. ”
The waiter came up and broke the build.
“Scotch and soda on the rocks.” I said.
“Make it two.”
I looked at Cody again like a trooper. “So Cody,
make it later?”
He laughed. “You're all lips, Mona, puffed up for
a kiss from the Western Hemisphere.”
The scotch and sodas arrived. We toasted to all
the hemispheres, right and left. And in my memory,
after our glasses clinked, everything went into slow
motion. We brought the glasses to our lips at the same
time, let the liquid slide down our throats till the heat
hit our bellies and exploded the barriers, and our eyes
zapped our minds and everything went paradise.
That Thursday I got to Cody's around eleven, late
as usual.
“Sorry I'm late.”
We looked at each other. I'm sure he could feel the
heat coming off of me, but he stood up to it or wasn't
interested. I couldn't tell. He just shook his head and
broke the gaze.
“Let's go,” he said.
“I'll buy the take-out Cody.”
“I packed lunch.” He said it so simple.
We were driving over the Golden Gate Bridge. I
love that bridge. Windows open, sea breeze hits. The
city looks like a magic kingdom in the dreamy distance
and you're so happy to be free from it.
“Want to get stoned?” I asked Cody.
“No.”
“Oh, come on. It's really nice homegrown. Really
pleasant. Makes you feel smart.”
“No Mona. I'll drive if you're going to smoke.”
We pulled off in Sausalito which is such a romantic
disappointment. But I got stoned and we got some coffee,
so I was reasonably content, except for Cody's fast
driving.
“Slow down please.”
“Trust me please.”
“You're making me nervous please.”
So he slowed down a little.
% “Cody, do you like your mom?”
He looked suspicious.
“I like my mom. Sure. She sends me clippings
sometimes. Hey, she sent me and Lewis Fazzeo off to
Woodstock with peanut butter and jelly sandwiches.”
“You were at Woodstock?”
“We told our moms we'd be home that night and
got back three days later. I was eating my peanut butter
and jelly sandwich when Richie Havens came on.”
We both laughed. Cody knows I love his stories
and he looked at me like he could go on, but I wanted
something else.
“Mona, my mom has her own life. So do I. What
are you driving at?”
“I have this theory about men and their moms.”
“I bet you do.”
“Do you trust her, Cody?”
“With what?”
“I don't know, with understanding you?”
Then he looked at me again like he'd figured
something out.
“No,” he said.
Then he started fiddling with the radio and there
was Dexter Gordon playing “Tenderly” so sweet it
broke my heart for awhile and I had to keep staring
out the car window, silent.
“How far is it?” Cody asked. We were walking
down the road to the beach.
“A little further West,” I said.
“C'mon, how far?” He was tense.
“A mile.”
We walked in silence through those curvy coastline
hills.
I love those hills. I always imagine I'm on a horse,
galloping along the open trails, space and wind and
power and freedom.
One summer I stayed in a cabin at the end of a
dead-end road, deep in the country. Every day I ran
bare-chested up an old logging road to the top of the
hill. I'd feel the sun on my breasts and my legs getting
stronger. At the top I'd throw my head back and paw
the ground, then run back downhill as fast as I could.
I was caught in those hills between the horse spirit
and Cody. Between history and freedom, like a breath
caught between an inhale and an exhale.
We were stretched out on a blanket watching the
foamy waves edge up on us and our foundation slowly
disappear. The tide was coming in.
“Who's the guy?” Cody asked.
“An architect. He grew up in Alaska.”
“Say no more. The guy likes obscure European
movies, has macho hiking boots, and you think his
bow ties are cute.”
I laughed because Cody is so psychic. “I'm just
getting to know him.”
“Spare me the details.”
“What do you want to know, Cody?”
“I want to know why we're here.”
“We're here to be together. To relax. To enjoy
each other. Can't you just let go a little? It's not
Alcatraz. It's beautiful here, soft round hills around us
and sand and ocean and I'm trying to be happy to be
with you. I want to feel close with you. Can't you just
give in to that? To this beautiful time and place?
Don't you like the rush when you just give in?”
Cody sat up, spine straight. “Yes.”
“Yes what?”
“Yes to the last question. I forgot the others. I
like rush. I'm a busy guy. Rush is normal to me.”
Cody looked at me, his eyes punctuating the sharp
edges of his words.
“Not busy, Cody. Stop being from the Bronx all
the time. You're so resistant.”
Cody didn't budge. “You're so greedy, Mona.”
That was it. I gave up. I threw everything into the
backpack. I had one shoe on and was ready to take off
when Cody stopped me with his question.
“Is it hard for you to see my pain?”
I sat there with one shoe on and looked at Cody
and it finally dawned on me. I wanted love, but I had
given up on Cody. I felt desire, but I'm not sure I ever
felt Cody. Maybe I was right in deciding we couldn't
make it together, but that didn't mean I was right in
leaving Cody behind. We were saying goodbye. That's
why we were there.
Sitting next to Cody, I let the anger subside, felt
the sorrow move in. There wasn't anything to do,
nothing to want. And in those huge moments when
neither of us moved, I felt myself finally connecting
with Cody. Then the sea washed up on our blanket
and I put on my other shoe. 

------------------

SHARED POEM ABOUT SEX (ii)
by E. Dan Fleischman

This is a score for a shared poem, which means that a poet reads the cues to a group of people,
leading them to specific memories and visualizations. Then, each member of the group contributes
words to the poem, which the poet jots. After arranging the words, the poet reads them back to the group.
SCORE:
i.
Let's think of sex.
And remember the first time you chose to have sex.
And recall the event; recall the setting; recall the mood; recall your emotions.
And think about your lover.
And focus on their name.
Fix upon your tongue the name of the lover.
Now, let us, one at a time, say these names.
ii.
Let's think of sex.
And think about orgasm.
And recall your most recent orgasm: where you were; who was there; what you did.
And remember the last word you said during sex or the last word you can imagine yourself saying during sex.
And fix that word upon the tip of your tongue.
Now let us, one at a time, say these words.
iii.
Let's think of sex.
And feel our sexualities; diverse unfettered of size of temperature of texture of tone
Fix upon your tongue the name of a body part, an animal, or words of your choosing.
Now let us, one at a time, say these words.
POEM: 27 May 1995. Artist's Cafe, San Francisco.
Fluid Hand Mona June
Wendy Rabbit Mike Pussy Finger Karen Steven Whitney Cock Eureka!
Liz Lamprey Kubla Kahn
Jay Brian Brain
Chad Armpit Anonymous
Hair Gene Faster Nipple
Yes Floor Jennifer Uhhhh!
Oh! Feet Hang On Claws at your neck. Sorry. Shit. Oh!
Tongue Luscious Stacy Rachel Adam's Apple Earlobe Merv Yes Yes Clavicle
Hand Toe God Lauren Wow Jen Yes You—Fuck!
Succulent Thigh Babe Ouch!
Nape Connection Shawn Andrea Alan Heart
Yes Trout Brandy Bets Uh!
Thanks Goodbye.

---------------------

SEX DEATH AND ELVIS
by Paul Langland

thoughts on Stephen Petronio’s The King is Dead
I always admire the Stephen Petronio company
for its smart choreography, wedded to
beautiful and strange sets, costumes, and lighting.
Often I feel the shadow of a reference slip by,
something consciously intended by Stephen, but
only delivered to the watcher in a way that triggers
more unconscious involvement in the work, deepening
its appeal by deepening the mystery. So, I
was startled while watching The King Is Dead for
a second time at the Joyce Theater in NYC last
spring, to have a whole narrative, a tough fairy tale
of the ’90s, suddenly lope into my head. I left,
moved by this beautiful piece, now discovered as a
tragedy, with new appreciation for Stephen’s passionate
story-telling.
In this piece, the company tells a paradoxical
tale—obvious yet hidden, ancient and painfully
current—about our need for heroes, innocence
turned to horror, our silly, huge narcissism and
alienation from each other until forced into love
and compassion when facing our friends’, family’s
and our own death.
In watching the dance again, I went from analytical
appreciation to intense emotion as the story
became clear. I’ll try to convey the story, and
describe the post-modern techniques that give this
piece its clout. The sureness of Stephen’s craft
(and that of lighting designer Ken Tabachnick,
costume designer Manolo, and visual designer/
photographer Cindy Sherman) was heartening in
spite of the work’s dark nature. I came away satisfied
that contemporary work can be classically
strong; metaphor, myth, narrative, abstraction, and
technique were woven well—difficult in an age of
soundbites, TV, and fast-track living. Perhaps
Stephen’s brave celebration of our dangerous contemporary
culture is one reason he can pierce our
thick skins.
The King Is Dead opens with Stephen dancing
a solo. In my first viewing, I saw this as a witty,
indulgent moment of dancing to Elvis’s “Love Me
Tender,” Elvis loving Stephen with his music,
Stephen loving dancing to it. But there’s more.
Stephen is Elvis, letting himself be the King of
Crooning, “singing” alluringly in a dance full of
softness, innocence and desire. The risque leather-
belted costume and gentle gyrations are sultry
Elvis the Pelvis, a fresh boy who lets the world
admire his body, bumping and grinding for all.
Like Elvis, lusted after and dreamed about,
Stephen invites worship of his sexy self.
A big change happens. Two photographic
portraits of truncated, bandaged bodies
appear side by side, projected on the
upstage wall. A trio enters in cold blue
light. The music changes. Why
Bolerol The soft but insistent score
creates a moody anticipation. The trio
dances queasily not quite together, one
person behind a unison duet. They are
wearing fashionably-torn grunge costumes
of lingerie or bandages, much
like the bodies in the slides which
cross-fade continually behind them.
Wham! I get it. They are courtiers in
the palace. Wham, of the dead king.
The courtiers are dead. The portraits
are of dead royalty. Wham, Elvis the
King is dead. Elvis, whom we love
and worship. This is about us, a myth
of our time.
The dancing has shifted from the
introspective softness of the opening
solo to drier, harder, more linear movement,
as the trio becomes like mannequin-fans
of the king, attempting
homage and court ritual. There is jadedness
and searching. The grungy outfits
are a disintegration of the tough
leather-belted costume of the opening.
Though both looks are sex-focused—
the first, the young, full-of-life Elvis of
the ’50s, the second, the decayed style
of the youth culture of the ’90s.
The Bolero music drives on, its
length now not a promise of shining
climax but of increasingly relentless
emptiness. The stage populates with
more dancers. Lights color the set half
blue, half red. Sometimes the cast
crosses back and forth through the middle.
Sometimes they mirror each other,
an image of narcissism, eroding reality
even more as they diminish into mere
uncoordinated reflections of themselves.
Dark expectations accumulate.
Spells are cast on or by the palace
denizens. Something or someone is
coming. A prophesy will be revealed.
In my chair I think, “This is like a tarot
of the future.” At that moment, one of
the slide portraits is of a three-eyed
face, an ancient alchemical image of
evil. Suddenly, He arrives. He is the
king, the leader, the one we bow to,
and live for. I can almost hear, “The
King is dead, long live the King!”
Stephen, returned as the dead king,
has slipped into the ensemble like a
quiet contagion. Hooded, he resembles
Death in Bergman’s Seventh Seal. I
think for a moment, “What outrageous
permission Stephen gives himself,”
before I’m pulled back to the story.
The dead sexy king has returned to
reign in the kingdom of lust and death.
But there is a problem. What can
he proclaim but more lust and death?
It’s a bitter moment. The cast falls and
rolls slowly at the king’s feet, dying
and dying again, not knowing they are
driven, or by what. Not knowing they
are dead. Flashing on our present
lives, I wonder why these beautiful
vassals have to die. Is it AIDS? Drug
overdose? War?
Stephen’s solo now is a scary
reprise of the opening, recontextualized
by the way the piece has careened into
darkness. What was alluring now
seems selfish and self-absorbed. The
dead king celebrates being worshipped,
not even seeing those who worship
him. How great to play dead Elvis
returned to rule in a kingdom of sexed-
up ghouls. Elvis, the weird saint of
rock-and-roll, actually becoming an all-
powerful king! Even with our worn-
out cynicism, we must still blindly
worship heroes, come what may. This
is how my thoughts travelled as I
watched; the courtiers enslaved by the
king, driven not by intelligence, but by
some unknown biology which is in all
of us.
Even more than raising the issue of
hero-worship, The King Is Dead
evokes sadness for the “fun” world of
sex, drugs, and rock-and-roll, now
compromised not only by life’s usual
big troubles, but by the sudden and
relentless disaster of AIDS. Oddly, as
the piece progresses, as the virtuosic
cast struggles and dies, a sense of heart
and compassion develops. We can
identify with these denizens of the
kingdom of death who need to believe
in something, to love or lust someone.
They are or were human. They suffer.
They are us. We are exorcised vicariously.
The king leaves as suddenly as he
appeared. A knee-jerk ecstasy follows,
the ensemble celebrating the ghost visit
of the dead king. True to the tone of
the piece, ecstasy is danced in unison,
which now has a feeling of isolation.
As the bi-colored lighting dissolves,
the loss of distinction between self and
reflection is complete. The cast spins
on the frantic climax of Bolero, then
exits for a split second. In the music’s
crashing last notes, they reappear in
two close-knit groups, touching each
other almost for the first time. The
touch continues in the music’s after-
math. In silence, they slowly ease one
woman and one man to the floor. Both
have died. The cast gently witnesses
their death.
I thought first of all of my friends
lost to and living with AIDS. Then I
thought, “how pathetic and heroic we
are.” Then I thought, “what a brilliant
collage of unlikely elements, even
Bolero works as an image of long-term
trauma.” Then I thought about the
company; the magically strong women
and delicate, spritely men create rich
gender confusion. I looked around at
the savvy New York audience titillated
by what could be seen as fashionable
post-modern entertainment, circa
1990s. Unless delved into further, The
King Is Dead might read as a well-
crafted embodiment of heartlessness
and surface. How ironic that is. ❖


---------------------

UNZIPPING GOD
by Jon Weaver

performance text
Charging & diving through the
space, I tenderly say these words.
My improvised movement is
generated by the rhythms of
breath, the em bodim ent of the
images, & the tum ble of weight &
momentum.
This text is an excerpt from
Zipper, created in 1993 for the
Edge Festival in San Francisco.
The video-stills are from a 1987
video-performance trilogy, With.
In both works, the unity of sex &
spirit, body & soul is the primary
investigation. My experiences as
a queer man, a meditator & an
ecstatic, & my studies of contact,
animals & developmental patterns
are reflected in the movement,
meaning & form of these
performances. From the
beginning, what has engaged me
is the experience I have, while
dancing, of the interpenetration
of the sensual body, the
awakened mind & the material
world. It is not a concept,
philosophy or fact, it is a
sensation.
Dancing is my spiritual practice.



dear god,
I am imagining you lying under me on your belly & I am ever so slowly setting my cock
on the rim of your asshole & tenderly pushing inside. I am waiting for that moment when
you open & your body says yes & we fall into the rhythm of two men in pleasure.

dear god,
I am imagining you as each cell of my body — that's 50 trillion cells, each one a god. And
each god contains over 3 billion years of evolutionary knowledge. Now, what I want to
know is, with each cell sharing all that hard-won knowledge with every other cell — why
can't I balance my checkbook?

dear god,
Why does this random collection of atoms think that they are me? Since every atom is
changing, exchanging, moving in & out of mouth & lungs & skin & bowels all the time —
why do I believe that I am I? Since there is no separation between the atoms of air & body
& chair & earth, only a flow of particles & emptiness — why do I feel so alone?

dear god,
I am thinking about armies. Armies of dancers. Squadrons, platoons, units, companies of
dancers. And whenever fighting breaks out, they move. By sea, by air, overland — they
get there fast. And they dance onto the battlefields & into bunkers & at headquarters, and
the amazing thing is that the movement is so honest & compelling that the soldiers with
guns begin to sing, making music for the dance. Thousands of dancers surrounded by
thousands of singers with guns, shooting bullets high into the air making rhythm for the
dance. And the motion & the sound tell a story of how to plant the weapons & grow food.
How bullets become wildflowers, and rifles grow corn or potatoes or rice. Fields of
landmines become forests. And stealth bombers turn into oases with cool water &
birdsong & shade. I want to see this happen. I think I am going to need a lot of help.

dear god,
Lying on top of you, holding your dick in my hand, we catch our breaths & I feel my cock
soften & slip out of your butthole. I hold you close & you begin to sob & whisper how
lonely you feel & how vulnerable. How life is so random & everything seems out of
balance. How things just aren't working out the way you'd hoped for. And it's all your
fault. And I whisper back, "yeah, you're right," & you sigh & I kiss you & we hold each other
together through the night.

love, jon


---------------------

TAKING THE GLOVE WITHOUT THE HAND
by Mary Fulkerson

an historical perspective

The development of post-modern dance, as it occurred in the U.S., brought dance from a symbolic language to a personal, gestural language. Choreography changed from being mainly presentational and deterministic to being self-reflexive, and concerned with what it is to be present within experience. This resulted, in some cases, in dancers being asked to collaborate in the final manifestation of forms. This, altogether, led to descriptions of essential being within dance.

Marking the beginning of this period, Merce Cunningham and John Cage showed the person in a complex system of compositional thought which was conjured up by Cunningham’s imaginative movement landscapes and chance processes. This was a revelation of the person in concentration upon the complexities of specific body experiences which in themselves carried meaning. Dancers’ faces revealed their concentration upon the formal concerns of the piece, rather than on communication with an audience, or on effect of the piece overall. This method of concentration became widely imitated and the blank face became a stylistic phenomenon of the period. The aim of the Cage-Cunningham collaboration—to place the dancer in the field of experience related to the creators’ personal world view, and to let movement speak for itself—was not widely imitated. But the chance methods of their work and aspects of its outward appearance have often been appropriated. This has led only to cheap imitation.

With the valued and rich contribution that the Cage-Cunningham dialogue has brought to the field of dance, a lot of confusion regarding expression and the dancer-as-whole-person has arisen. It is irrelevant and inappropriate to ask that their truly great work address this confusion, as the work looks to other areas of concern for its legitimacy. However, these issues have remained, asking to be addressed by others.

The post-modernist search for the real person in dance, the whole person, the holistic act of performing, and the non-manipulative approach to the audience, paralleled closely developments in the art world at that time. Exploration, along with development and extension of audience perception, replaced gratification, fulfillment and appeasement of the audience (art viewer). Both visual and dance artists were asking the audience to think, be aware of concepts, and enter into a search for understanding of work.

By the end of the ’60s, the experimental forefront of dance had become democratic, personal, human scale, individual, idiosyncratic, and less presentational. It also began to have associative codes of practice, which accompany all periods of art as they develop. For some dancers of this time, these codes of practice involved examination of the morals of decision-making. Guidelines for how dancers could behave and what things they could do replaced choreography and “steps” for some choreographers. This led inevitably to both distrust and curiosity within the technical establishment which maintained strict rigor and definition through inherited techniques.

When Yvonne Rainer left the dance world, depriving it of one of its clearest thinkers, her code of practice, her social charter, which was fully articulated within Continuous Project Altered Daily (1969), remained influential, and spoke for a whole generation of exploring choreographers. The essential message was “No” to all forms of social dominance or intimidation within performance and practice of dance. Perhaps what drove her out of the dance world and into film (where “final cut” means ultimately a clear description of artistic authority within work) was her failure to reconcile her social charter within the competing wills of performers of tremendous quality, strength and character. Her collaborators, dancers of the group Grand Union, inherited her social charter (having also influenced its creation), and with it a desire to resolve the problem of how to create dance work which put its ideas into practice. Steve Paxton is one of these inheritors, and Contact Improvisation is one of these practices.

Steve developed Contact Improvisation
in a framework of thought which
included reference to his experience of
gymnastics, the work of Cage and Cunningham,
the work of Yvonne Rainer
and others of his contemporaries, Aikido
practice, and the then just recently
emerging systems of body and mind integration,
such as Release Work. First
and foremost, his work came from his
personal instincts, from his desires as a
person and as an artist.
Steve brought together a social
charter for behavior between people
which formed a subtext to the work,
but, as taught by Steve, this charter was
never made an explicit code of practice.
The work was primarily physical,
and dealt with weight, mass, energy,
balancing, decision-making, risk, limitation
and possibility. He did not lecture
on morality. Yes, there was a decision
at the start, among the small group
of people who first did Contact work
with Steve, that sexuality and expression
were not the focus nor the emphasis
of the work. But this was never
presented as the antithesis to being a
whole person. Quite the contrary, in
fact. The possibility of using the work
to positively contribute to one’s own
personal development was implicit in
the work structure and movement dialogues.
It was important to be present
within a specific world of experience
with specific demands of intention and
concentration. Sexuality and expression
were not central to that world.
Steve made an example of himself,
trying to treat everyone fairly in his
work. Without communicating his
ideas verbally, he found a form which
was inherently politically correct. His
work began to be described and taught
by others. Verbally, and in print, Contact
dancers and teachers described
their experiences, some of them highly
revealing and enlightening experiences,
and this contributed to the establishment
of an identity for the work. People
were investing their life energy in
this form and were participating in the
creation of its ideology. The code of
practice for Contact was being written
through their experiences. The exact
specificity of the work created the possibility
for much imitation of form
without a full and complete understanding
of the work as an evolving,
encompassing and changing entity.
The code became, in some cases, restrictive
and limited regarding images
of sexuality, desire, dominance, and expression.
Any demonstration of difference
between the sexes began to be
frowned upon, and some Contact
teachers began to downplay their own
sexuality and that of the students within
their workshops. This was done
with the aim of reconciling roles between
men and women which had been
for so long (and continue to be today)
scandalously unequal in the dance
world.
Dancers of Contact have often been
left with provisos like: “Don’t pretend,”
“Don’t play, it’s serious, and someone
might get hurt,” “Don’t deceive,”
“Give clear signals,” “Don’t seduce the
dancing partners or the audience,” and
“Anything is possible.” Each of these
sentences is meaningful in itself and of
course has its place, but when pushed
to extremes provides personal and
artistic censorship. Additionally, any
proviso taken out of context and applied
as a formula or recipe that replaces
actual decision-taking, can replace the
spirit of inquiry within work and reduce
it to a hollow shell, empty of its
real meaningfulness. This is the case
of taking the glove without the hand.
With the shrinking
of the U.S. government
arts funding in
the 1980s, there was
a rush to legitimacy
within the whole of
the dance world. In
fact, all the arts felt
pressure to legitimize
their existence within
a field of shrinking resources, which
meant greater competition for funding,
venues and actual survival.
In dance, this concentrated itself on
a seeking for legitimacy within skills
and technique. More traditional
dancers found themselves broadening
their range of experiences to include
the work of experimental dancers, and
frequently this resulted in uninformed
imitation. Soon after Contact began, it
was appropriated by traditional choreographers,
making it a sort of exhibition
of set movements which simply broadened
the range of activities formerly
called “partnering.” This appropriation
has continued, and
there are now very many choreographers
who attribute their
“partnering” to Contact without
really knowing to what they
refer. The heart of the matter
was sometimes lost in a flurry of imitation.
It is to be remembered that this is
often done with all the good will in the
world, and with lots of respect for the
form of Contact, but unfortunately
without the time, resources, and interest
for thorough investigation to take
place.
Another effect of the rush to legitimacy
was seen in the search for technical
description within Contact itself.
The act of just throwing body weight
onto a standing support was replaced
by a consideration of how this might be
occurring. Language developed from
the start, but the vocabulary to speak
about Contact took some time to develop,
and is still developing. This is appropriate
within an experimental form
which has change at its foundation.
It is interesting to look back now at
very early Contact Quarterlies to see
the halting steps of this beginning language
development. This process was
influenced by the appropriation of aspects
of the form, which occurred even
amongst early Contacters. If you heard
a good idea in somebody’s workshop,
you could go out and use it directly, any
way you wanted. This also occurred as
students with little experience of the
form began to use it in their own work
and teaching. The desire to contribute
to the language of Contact has been felt
urgently by many participants,
and has led to
a strong and informed
body of thought about
the work. It has also
created arguments over
legitimacy and closeness
to the original source.
Most of the early teachers of Contact
who have continued to work with
the form have gone on to develop in-
depth codes of practice and ideology.
They continue to renew the form, and
involve themselves in an ongoing developmental
relationship to information.
Many who have come more recently
to the form are being led to discover
the whole of the person, through
the realization that to work with Contact
means to inquire. These people
pass on the heart and soul of the work
through their genuine understanding.
They continue to re-invent Contact
today. They work with the realization
that the form is not limited, that it seeks
and develops maturity in individuals,
and allows for change and renewal.
The form itself presents opportunities
for discovery.
I am filled with respect for those
who continue to see it as a possibility
for development and change. However,
from the start, I have been disquieted at
programmatic, formalistic, and moralistic
manifestations of the form. The
challenge for Contact in the future, as I
see it, would be to grasp the essence of
the form—that being an involvement in
the ongoing questions of improvised
dance dialogue with emphasis on
principles of physics. Matter, force,
time-space and energy are the basic
components of the form. These are
governed by proprioception, imagination,
feeling and sensation. There is
enough here to form an endless inquiry.
I am remembering Contact today,
after twenty-seven years of developing
mind-body imagery within choreography.
I have been interested in the creation
of forms which are participatory,
chaotic, life-like in structure, which
allow for continual renewal and
change, as well as imply lines of predictability.
Through the last six years
of my work, I have developed the concept
“Responsible Anarchy” to contain
and guide this research. For me, Contact
is a form which rests comfortably
within this sphere of interest. Now,
looking back, I see why, through all
my years of work, I have found myself
repeatedly in the neighborhood of
Contact.

---------------------

THE SEX ISSUE
by Lori b and Steve Paxton

dialogue about sex & contact improvisation
summer ’94< i wrote a letter to
a i l CQ and suggested devoting
an issue to SEX. i have been curious
about the relationship between sex and
Contact Improvisation since beginning
my practice of the form five years ago.
in class, not one of my teachers mentioned
sex and this i found odd because
people talked about it regularly outside
of class, i could not tell whether this
omission was a reflection of the general
cultural taboo around “conscious” sex
(by which I mean approaching the
subject in a clear, articulate, and unambiguous
manner) or whether the omission
was more intentional and specific
to the form.
i went to the source to make this inquiry.
Steve Paxton, originator of Contact
Improvisation, agreed to be interviewed
on the condition that he might
also interview me. this partly explains
how we moved from interview to dialogue.
we did three sessions in march of
1995, during and just after the Breit-
enbush Jam in Oregon, our meetings
resulted in a mountain of material—
about sex, Cl and a slew of other topics,
these conversations created a much-
needed opportunity for me to clarify,
amplify, and further explore my feelings
about Contact Improvisation and its relationship
to sex, to community, and to
social change.
in may of 1990, i graduated from Columbia
University with a Masters Degree
in clinical social work, i had returned to
school after a twelve-year hiatus from
formal education, i also completed a
three-year certification in Rubenfeld®
Synergy Method, a body-based psychotherapy
system integrating Alexander
Technique, Feidenkrais Method, and
Gestalt psychotherapy.
that summer, i was lured to a ping-
pong party at a loft in downtown Manhattan.
the doubles game was raucous,
hilarious, and very free-form, much of it
on the floor and off the wall, i inquired
about my partner and he identified himself
as David Hurwith, a dancer and a
teacher of Contact Improvisation, i
asked, “what’s Contact Improvisation?”
the rest, as they say, is history.
David became my first Contact
teacher and, two weeks later, he took
me to West Virginia where I was initiated
into full-scale Contact milieu at the
East Coast Jam. after my first shy
evening, i began to dance in the group
and i knew i had stumbled into something
very important, the dynamic
sense of community i experienced
there, the profound feeling of something
tribal, created a remarkable sensation
of home-coming, i felt the embrace of
my sensuality and sexuality, this community
feeling continues to be a feature
of many environments in which the form
is practiced.
touch was a central value in my family.
i was raised by a philosopher and a
pediatrician, both my parents were
nudists and very committed sensualists,
my mother was deeply rooted in Body,
and she initiated my father into the life
of the senses, she adored nature,
music, gardening, dancing, eating, and
sex (not in that order).
as a baby doctor, my mother communicated
with her patients mostly
through touch, her method was strongly
intuitive and her perception of the
world was largely kinesthetic, she
claimed to practice medicine with her
ovaries, as a young woman, she saw a
Reichian therapist for a time and this
work shaped some of her primary values.
my mother was pained about the
sex-negative attitudes in our culture and
she was particularly disturbed about the
way children are shamed about their
sexuality.

my father, the child of Polish immigrants,
believed absolutely in the social
contract: a notion that'we must repay
society for all it has given to us. he instilled
this idea firmly within me which
no doubt accounts for my desire to do
service, to change the world, and to see
myself (perhaps inflated) as a visionary,
i offer this simple sketch as background
about who i am and how it is that i
came to be a person who wants to
change the way the world sees sex.
because of who i am, i see the practice
of Contact Improvisation as a vehicle,
and possibly an agent, for social
change. Cl is a powerful conduit for
both expression and communication, i
believe it is a channel and a repository
for values, it is also a striking medium
for metaphor.
sex is very present in my dancing,
it’s not specifically where I’m headed
when I dance, but it is an energy center
and an exquisite source, it is one aspect
of full body vitality.
i believe that what we do affects the
world, it is possible that people dance
this form without intending to change
the world, but i suspect that the world
gets changed whenever people dance
the form. Contact Improvisation is a
subversive activity: in its very practice, it
challenges people to investigate their
relationship to touch, intimacy, sensuality
and sex.

what follows has been much edited,
juggled, and generally struggled over,
many fascinating branches were pruned
in the interest of coherence and
essence, i have been very curious
about the experience of other dancers,
movers, and body workers about how
sex affects community, how it affects
practice, and about the social ramifications
of sex. it is my hope that further
dialogue will be stimulated. [L.b]
LORI: I’d like to talk with you about the
relationship between sex and Contact
Improvisation. I was curious about the
fact that none of my teachers had ever
mentioned sex or sexual feelings or
sexual arousal or anything to do with
sexuality as part of an introduction to
the form. I’ve studied with a lot of people
and I’ve frequently heard sex talked
about at jams and wherever people
were practicing the form, but I never
heard my teachers even allude to it. So
I became curious about whether this
had anything to do with the form’s originator.
That’s why we're here.
STEVE: Well, I used to talk about it.
And I would say that Contact had aspects
of touch that were like those in
sex, as do other things. It’s a message,
touching. And that’s, I think, the connection.
As for people talking about it,
what did they say?
Lori: People spoke about what happened
when they became sexually
aroused when they were dancing
Contact. People talked about relationships
that they’d gotten into or sexual encounters
that they’d had, not as a result
of the form, but from being in close contact,
and somehow emerging out of the
sensuality, and the permission...
Steve: What permission? To touch?
Lori: Yeah, absolutely. It’s not permission,
it’s actually...
Steve: ...an instruction, [laughter]
Lori: The shadow side is people talking
about coming to a Contact class or jam,
and feeling violated, not having explicit
instructions or reinforcement for maintaining
clear boundaries. When you
said that you spoke about sex, was it
when you first began teaching? I would
like a bit of history.
Steve: Well, I started teaching in 1972,
to a group of 17 people, whom I had selected.
I thought they were a bunch of
great athletes who wouldn’t be hurt by
experimenting with this form. They
were young, most were in their 20s...
Lori: How old were you?
Steve: I was about 32. Improvisation
before Contact, as I had experienced it,
was all over the map. It could mean
anything. It tended to mean emotion-
based movement expression... So I
was looking for a way to kind of pin it
down. I was interested in defining the
word for myself. With this form, a kind of
improvisation was caused— it was
touch-based and it was a two-way communication
all the time. People were so
busy communicating and sensing and
acting all at once that they couldn’t preview
many of their movements so they
just had to react. It was a very present-
minded event, and it threw into the
space actions that weren’t intellectual or
predetermined, by and large.
Lori: When you said you began Teaching”
the form in '72, had you been experimenting
on yourself?
Steve: I had been working for two
years on a solo, which was to free up
my movement and get used to what I
now call the “sphere of movement.” I
guess I was working on that idea. And I
tried to teach it to some men at Oberlin
College in a class. This work became
the performance called Magnesium.
During that event there was a lot of sensory
testing and development and there
was a lot of collision. To make the collision
safe, I had to teach them how to
roll, I had to teach them how to collide
in the air and fall together, and stuff like
that.
Lori: And was that
stuff you knew already?
Steve: Well, from
martial arts. I had to
pull together all the information
I had about
the body. I had to pull
together yogic, medi-
tational, aikido, and
gymnastic material, to
figure out how this
stuff should be directed.
How was it possible
to teach it? What
did I need to know
about the students in
order to guide them to
go further into the
sphere and into interaction
with another
person?
Lori: What I saw in
the video of Magnesium
was very athletic,
all the throwing and
catching on the gym
mats. Were you working
with slow contact at that point?
Steve: No. Magnesium happened in
January ’72. I began working much
more slowly that spring at Bennington
College. The next performance event
happened in June with students from
Bennington, Rochester, Oberlin, and
dancers from New York.
Lori: Mixed gender?
Steve: Yeah, mixed gender. And one
love affair developed in that group. I
think it started off from the erotic quality
of their touch. I got to watch them
working in this form which is so much
about cooperation and touch and
photographer unknown
Steve Paxton
communication and a kind of almost
extra-sensory awareness of other
people.
But my feelings were, and still are,
that I am not somebody who feels he
understands sex. I presume it’s everybody’s
own trip, and that when mature
people come into a room to do a touch-
based form, they go through all of these
trips. I’m not sure it’s the responsibility
of the teachers or the form to...I mean
we’re not a psychotherapy group...
Lori: I think that’s a big question, that
issue of responsibility. For instance,
coming into a learning environment
which is, by definition, hierarchical...
Steve: ...Under those circumstances,
what responsibility do I have about your
sexuality?
sexually evocative. And touch is the
fundament of Contact Improvisation.
Lori: Well, it may be included in: what
responsibility do you have about my
dancer’s body? Clearly, there are limits
to that, but as a teacher, I feel responsible
about creating a container. Obviously
at a jam it’s different (though perhaps
the community needs to be responsible
for creating the container...). On one
level I think, “Oh Steve's right, this
sex stuff is extraneous.” But because
touch has been so marginalized to the
sexual arena in our culture, it is instantly
Steve: Then it does have to do with the
container that is created. The container
that I created is one with a strong emphasis
on words like gravity, momentum,
friction; strong investigation into the
senses, one’s own senses... Physical
safety has always been mainly what I
wanted to be responsible about.
In the very early days, I was just trying
to get the form to manifest in different
peoples’ bodies so they could do it
safely. I wasn’t sure how safe it was.
I’d never seen anything like this taught.
I didn’t have models. Aikido is a little bit
like it and I noticed in Aikido that the
mat is very chaotic a lot of the time.
One of the things that seems to be a
principle there is that everybody is responsible
for their own pathway— not
colliding. Therefore, the experiment in
Magnesium was to get people to be
aware in all directions.
Later, I offered clear instructions,
starting usually on the head— which is a
slightly de-sexualized touching place—
two people rolling their heads around
on each other while standing. It’s a
point of touch, and this point of touch
has parameters, physical laws, and
those parameters are that both people
are feeling exactly the same pressure at
any moment, feeling exactly the same
changes, and they’re feeling exactly the
same surface area— the amount of skin
surface that is touching one is touching
the other. Now, the mental focus of
each person is just on that point. So
you have the focus of each mind just a
few cells apart. So this physical model
is established on the body, and it rolls
down from the heads onto softer tissue,
more erotic tissue.
Now, I’m of two minds about how to
discuss the lower body, below the
neck...[laughter]. One is that sometimes
I just feel like sex is the only energy
that’s really happening and everything
else is peripheral to it. And other times,
I say to myself that sex has been so
foisted on this culture, that we really
need to take a break, and get back to a
sensory experience that isn’t sexualized.
A lot of my thinking about Contact
comes from watching animals develop.
I once had two kittens. Those kittens
loved to touch and groom each other,
lots of bouncing and wrestling, and just
lying together and rolling around, sleeping
together. There was this continuum
of touch in their lives. Then they got a
little older, and it was clear that some of
the activity was hunting preparation.
Then it turned into eroticism, sexual
preparation. It’s just genetically programmed
stuff, I suppose. They’re not
improvising, are they? They’re just acting
out and learning, and the movement
is turning on different parts of the brain
and there’s a developmental pathway
that they’re on.
So with Contact Improvisation, I
guess I was trying to take the human
body back to a time when perhaps sexuality
was more innocent and less programmed
for pleasure and for procreation.
Going back there and trying to
recapitulate what we might have lost
when development got stopped because
we entered school and a kind of
rigidity came into our lives— a really
intense denial of the body. I mean, sitting
for hours and hours.
To me what was lost was the
chance to be throwing ourselves around
in an environment and developing other
centers in the brain for our survival: we
needed sphericity, we needed climbing,
we needed swimming... We needed
the senses to open to an extraordinary
degree in order to be as aware of the
surroundings as possible, and to be
able to maintain that with a kind of zen-
like attention.
So, I was trying to get back to that.
That’s the container I try to make, a
place of incredible exquisite quiet, with
great patience, with a lot of attention to
what’s going on in the body. It doesn’t
preclude sexual arousal, but I think that
sex is just part of the spectrum. We’re
incredibly focused on it, we’re very geni-
talized in this culture. I think that if I
were to look at the whole thing from a
sexual perspective I would say that I
want the sexual sensations to be
throughout the body and the senses,
rather than crotch-bound.
Lori: This is consistent with childhood
sexuality—also, the freedom from consummation.
There’s absolutely no goal
in the experience of sex as a child, or
sensuality as a child; there’s no model
for what’s supposed to happen—no
orgasms held up as the point of reference,
no coupling, no marriage. When I
say that my Contact teachers haven’t
addressed sex, I don’t mean to blame
anyone for failing to correct what the
culture has bungled. It’s just that sometimes,
in my excitement about our subculture,
I imagine we might be capable
of solving some bigger problems.
Steve: I think we do solve some. It’s
my experience, after all these years at
Breitenbush, in spite of the incident
where somebody touched somebody
inappropriately once, people really do
trust each other here. There’s an incredible
amount of very casual, very
friendly touch with people that you don’t
know very well. The form in general
seems to continue to be not that hassled
by sexual neurosis.
Lori: I agree with you—a lot of the
hope that I have, and that obviously you
had, in terms of the container that we’re
speaking of, gets realized in our gatherings.
I do expect that we can do it better
here (in the Contact community).
You’re saying that we are doing it differently
than the culture by not emphasizing
sex. But not speaking doesn’t
create change.
I agree with you that some aspects
are different in Contact—people have a
form to access the kind of energy you
were talking about, this kind of innocence.
But we still live in this culture
and the shadow of sexuality persists in
large measure. There is enormous distrust
of the body, and this functions as
some form of social control.
Do you believe that perception
about sex is being changed through our
dancing? Do you think people go out
from this community and live differently
in the world?
Steve: I don’t know, but I think we’re
studying something together. I think
we’re studying ourselves and we’re
studying the form and we’re studying
avenues to get older without losing the
body, losing it to the sedentary insanity
of this culture. This work takes an incredible
amount of material to be dug.
It’s an ore, it’s not a refined thing. It’s
like human bauxite.
Lori: Contact Improvisation as a form?
Steve: Contact itself. I’ve been saying
the same thing for twenty-five years...
it’s a raw material. So I got a little bit
disturbed when I realized that people
were taking this raw material and accepting
it as is. So I’m now trying to
bring back into the Contact world the
idea that there is technical work here to
be studied. And the reason to study it,
to take a technical point of view, is
because it is the way out of the improvi-
sational paradox, which is: what to do
when you run into your own habits?
How do you get out of them?
Technique is the way out. Remember
when I said I want to go back to this
innocent place? Well, I also am taking
it out of that innocent place by looking
at it technically. In my teaching of Material
for the Spine now, I think I’m saying,
“OK now, what is this spine doing, and
how can I make this spine more available
to people, and what do we need to
know about the spine and how it
works?” And, of course, you can’t isolate
the spine from the rest of the body,
so suddenly you’re into all this, “Well,
what is an arm? What is a leg?” So,
currently I’m redefining those terms.
Putting it out as class material.
Lori: When you’re teaching Material
for the Spine, do you do some kind of
assessment, tracking who’s in the class?
Steve: Yeah, a lot of assessment. I
spend the first couple of days doing
work in which I am looking at the students,
trying to see what their awareness
of space might be. I take things
very slowly and I watch how they
work...
Lori: Have you ever been in a teaching
situation where someone came to you
and said, “I feel like this person is
touching inappropriately, or touched me
inappropriately?” I’ve heard of several
situations like this.
Steve: Nobody’s ever said that to me...
Well I do remember one thing, where a
bunch of women came together and
were talking about a man, and they included
me in the discussion. He was
somebody who was just having trouble,
and they got him through it, they got
him past sexual touching.
Lori: This is interesting. It’s so
charged. Is it etiquette? Is this ethics?
How can we say such things to a peer?
Unlike some kinds of physical activity
which can be described in a straightforward
manner, touch involves intention. I
think there’s a fine line that makes it difficult
to say whether or not I have a sexual
intention when I touch you.
Also, an historical gender issue
comes up. Women have for so long
been accused of attracting unwanted attention
by the way they dress, the way
they walk. So there’s always the fear
that somehow, as a woman, I brought
this sexual attention on just by putting
my body near you. There’s also the
possibility that maybe I’m just imagining
it. So I think there is confusion for people
about whether they imagine something
sexual is happening and about
what part they inadvertently play in it.
Steve: Maybe people are not so insecure
about this happening. Maybe they
figure it’s going to happen, and so it’s
dismissible.
Lori: That’s true. Take erections, for
example. In a dance, some people are
totally freaked out by an erection. Other
people say, “Oh, this happens. Sometimes
we laugh in a dance and sometimes
we get erections." It’s just one of
the possibilities...
Two years ago, I participated in a
sex talk at [the California] Harbin Jam
and what we managed to do best—this
group of people I consider fairly bold
and open, people who’ve been dancing
Contact for some time—was to formulate
a list of questions. And what we
managed to do worst was to answer
any of them or even really formulate a
way of talking about the questions. I
think sex is a very hard topic to talk
about.
Steve: I think touch is harder to talk
about than sex. Literature on sex goes
back thousands and thousands of
years. Literature on touch is intricately
linked to that history, but touch, by itself,
is a fairly unexplored sense. The
awareness of what it is seems very low,
or what its potential is, or what we do
with it, or how it effects our lives.
Lori: Literature including sex goes
back thousands of years, but about
sex... Of course, there are some documents,
some how-to manuals. The
Kama Sutra is stunning. But a how-to
manual is not something which really
explores how sex affects the community.
It’s not something which explores the
social ramifications of sex.
Steve: What about the theatrical literature?
What about theater? They’re trying
to cope with these issues, present
them. I feel that before psychology,
they were our psychological references.
I mean, it’s no accident that Freud
discussed things in terms of Oedipal
complexes or that he references Greek
theatre as archetypical.
Touch has a more scant literature.
Maybe the discrimination between
touch and sex is difficult to make because
touch is unexplored, rather than
because sex is difficult to discuss. I
mean, we explore sight and hearing
incredibly. We exploit them, use them,
they’re our cultural tools. Touch has
been excluded from that realm. Touch
is a sense which is repressed instead
of developed. The exploration of the
senses has largely happened through
the arts.
Lori: I appreciate your attempt to tease
apart touch and sex...
Steve: Well, the body is the instrument
for both, right? A sexual encounter and
a Contact Improvisation— the body is
the same instrument. When you talk
about hunger or satisfaction, you have
to specify whether you’re talking about
dinner or last night.
Lori: In conversation about dances,
people say, “No, it wasn’t sexual for me,
but it was very sensual.” I’m trying to
figure out whether sexuality is a sub-set
of sensuality.
Steve: I think it is. I think that’s a good
relationship for those two words...

Vision is one of the senses, and it’s
possible for that to be absolutely non-
sexual or extremely sexual. Touch, the
same way. Absolutely non-sexual or
extremely sexual. But, they’re both
sensual events.

Lori: I forget quickly, when I’m in our
group, how sense-deprived people are
in the larger community. For many people,
there is a huge issue about how
to tell the difference between touch-
touch and sex-touch. Social workers
have invented programs to protect
children against being victimized sexually,
teaching them how to read safe-
touch. Many adults could use this information
too, I guess. There are tons
of adults who don’t know what their
own intention is in touching, who have
been so desensitized that just any
touch is WOW! A huge explosion!

Steve: That’s why I used to start
Contact classes with contact between
heads. It seemed a fairly non-erotic
area of the body. But anyway, in this
question of intent, we have to go back
to realizing that touch is a two-way
communication. Suppose somebody
touches you with whom you would like
to have a sexual encounter, but with
whom you know you can’t have a sexual
encounter.
Lori: Why not?
Steve: Because you’re married. Because
they’re married. Because they’re
your father ...[laughter]. You desire, but
you know that it’s not appropriate. What
do you do with the desire? Endure the
desire, repress the desire, ignore the
desire, but know it’s still there. And
then what do you do when that person
touches you, and perhaps touches you
tenderly? What do you do with that?
Lori: This hooks up with the consummation
issue. I’m really able and willing
and delighted to have a sexual experience
that is not consummated. I feel
my excitement, I feeI my arousal even,
and I do not have any intention of being
genital or even kissing. I’ve been in circumstances
when I was absolutely sure
I was not going to pursue sex with
somebody I was dancing with and we
went ahead and had really luscious,
sexual dances. This is a great place for
me, a lovely container.
Steve: It’s like saying “hello” to each
other’s sexual sides as well as everything
else.

Lori: Exactly. And when the communication
is two-way, and mutual, it’s
deeply satisfying. There are other times
when I’m dancing with a person who I
sense wants something from me that I
don’t want to give them. Sometimes
they want my weight, sometimes they
want to put me in the air, sometimes I
feel like they want to consume me...
That’s a circumstance in which touch is
two-way, but doesn’t feel mutual. When
I first began, I was less good at ending
those dances quickly.

Steve: Is that how you deal with it?

Lori: I am pretty clear about how much
discomfort I’m willing to endure. I spent
so many years abusing my body in so
many different ways. Having successfully
recalibrated the relationship between
my mind and my body, I don’t
push the limits very far. If I’m uncomfortable,
sometimes I say something.
“I’m not going up. I don’t trust you. I
don’t really know you. Let’s have a low
dance.’’ And sometimes I say, “I have to
get a glass of water now.” Sometimes I
also say that because I’m just hot and
thirsty...[laughter]. Have you had that
experience?

Steve: Oh yeah. I think I deal with it by
just not giving it to them if I don’t want
to give it to them, but I go on dancing.
It’s rare that they ask very much or for
very long, if what they want seems not
to be there. And if it’s not there, it’s not
there. That’s all. And so I’m not uncomfortable
with them asking.

Lori: I sometimes have the same feeling.
But it may be different for men and
women, there might be some gender
difference. At any rate, I won’t continue
dancing with someone who can’t figure
out what I don’t want. I think that’s dangerous
on a variety of levels, not the
least of which is physical.

Steve: Seems to me that one of the
things about touch is that it strengthens
the immune system. Like premature
babies who are massaged gain weight
incredibly fast compared to premature
babies who are not touched. Of course,
it stimulates the sexual system as a part
of a general stimulation of the systems.
So if one looked at a moment of mild
arousal as a strengthening of a system,
as opposed to a guilt-trip or a social no-
no, it might effect people’s attitudes
about what happens, what an arousal
event is. If they had some model about
it being actually a positive charge, the
warmth that’s generated between people,
as in social dancing, at a party, or
at a bar, or during a game. This stimulates
all the systems, and I think that’s
why we do it. It seems to me a little bit
weird to question this too much.

Lori: I had an intuition that because
Contact Improvisation is such a deeply
sensual form, it might have been a survival
strategy, initially, not to speak
about sexuality. Because people might
have been fearful, or very condescending.
Even in the '90s, I’ve heard people
say, “Oh Contact Improv is just a group
grope,” or, “that's just an excuse for sex.”
I wondered whether that had been a
concern of yours.
Steve: The idea of group gropes and
the whole Esalen California energy that
surrounded that idea was around when
I started Contact, and I didn’t think it
was very interesting. On the other
hand, at that time, one didn’t need a lot
of protection. I mean, if I had said that
Contact Improvisation was about the
rising of'the Kundalini and a kind of
Kama Sutra of dance improvisation, I
think people would have been very
interested.
Molly and Tim at DanceAbility workshop, Eugene, Oregon, 1994.
friction, over one’s sense of direction
and location and orientation.
Lori: So it wasn’t a defensive move.
Steve: No. Sexuality, conversation,
focused eyes or closed eyes, too much
initial communicating through the
hands, stuff like that, was tossed out of
the work because those things were
easily available in the culture. They
came in with the dancers and I invited
them back out again because those
things take precedence over one’s
sense of gravity, over one’s sense of
friction, over one’s sense of direction
and location and orientation.

Lori: I’m glad this came up. So not
including sexuality doesn’t necessarily
mean excluding it.

Steve: No, no, no, no. Exactly.

Lori: So you began to explore the form
with a group of college athletes but at
some point it changed from a confined
experiment, working with an ongoing
group, to putting up signs and opening
the doors to people who had had a
myriad of social and physical experiences.
This becomes a little bit different.
Your intention to leave out the
things that are readily available in the
culture doesn’t necessarily mean that
people do leave them out.

Steve: That’s right.

Lori: Which is why in a teaching circumstance
we must sometimes say.
“Let’s experiment with less conversation
in the room,” or, “For the first part of
class, let’s not use our hands... ”
Steve: You have to bring people to so
many senses with Contact Improvisation.
You have to bring them to their orientation.
Many people are not very well
oriented and, at first, the more spherical
they get, the more they lose it. So that
has to be investigated slowly. The
whole re-socialization process through
the special touch work in the studio
needs to be done slowly. See, when
Contact started, the ’60s— which was
probably the most sexualized decade of
the century— had just passed. I think
that times have changed since then.
Sexuality has become a very different
thing and probably it is time to look at
sex from the new perspective that has
arisen in the culture.
Lori: Yeah, well everybody mentions
gravity and counterbalance. Of course,
these are technical aspects of the form.
Here at the jam, we mention drinking
water, keeping hydrated, as an important
peripheral aspect of keeping the
body safe while dancing. Maybe now
we need to address the issue of touch
and its various components, of which
sexuality is one, as part of an introduction
to the form.
Steve: So, where is this information
about touch to be found?
Lori: My understanding of how people
learn to teach this form is through oral
and physical transmission. I mean, I’m
just becoming a teacher, and I’ve
learned from my teachers.
Steve: And the Quarterly.
Lori: There is that literature. Also, I got
an enormous amount of specific training
around touch and boundaries during my
education as a body-based psychotherapist
(Rubenfeld® Synergy). The entire
first year was about intention in touch,
quality of touch. It’s not about pleasure,
using touch in that way.
Steve: So what did you think when you
came into Contact? Gosh! You were
loaded.
Lori: Yup, I was loaded. I thought and
still think that Contact Improvisation is
exquisite and wonderful. I have a sense
that there’s more than just dancing
being practiced. I’m very curious about
all these other layers which do move
into the psychological realm. It is
incredible for people to have a place to
practice establishing boundaries, a
place to practice defining self. I agree
that Contact Improvisation is not psychotherapy,
but I think that the form is
truly therapeutic. And it’s important to
make that distinction. There’s this side-
effect: a lot of people are experiencing
enormous healing around touch, around
relationship, probably around sex.
It’s early in my teaching career so I
am developing my rap, my teacher’s
rap. There are certain things I like to
say in the beginning of a class, that
have to do with safety, keeping the
room safe, encouraging communication,
keeping aware. I’m just wondering what
it would be like to say, “We intend mostly
to dance here, and there are many
aspects of touch. One of them is sexual.”
Not a product warning, but naming
something that’s a fundamental part of
the experience we’re having.
Steve: You would make everybody
think of it at once... You know, for good
or ill, I don’t know. But, my feeling was
that it’s such a powerful image, such a
powerful force... Mention the word
“sex” or “sexual feelings,” and once it
was in the room, it took a while to get
back into gentler and perhaps more
physical realms. It’s a place where I
feel like it’s easy to get stuck. And
since flow is what the issue is here—
paying attention, and constantly adapting—
if I let those feelings take over,
then I simply have stopped doing Contact
and I’ve started doing something
else.
On the other hand, I don’t want to
deny that sexual feelings should or
could be there, I think they should be
there. To me, sex and sexual arousal
and sexual feelings in Contact are a
very insignificant aspect of what happens
in the form. I’m glad they’re there.
See, I don’t think sex and sexual
feelings are being handled properly at
all, but I see more and more that the
reason things grew the way they have is
because nobody knows what to do
about it. There are so many taboos and
laws and religious attitudes, all in conflict,
and all very deeply held. And I
wish it were true that we could just
name it or talk about it and make it
whole and healthy.
Lori: I think when difficult things don’t
get spoken, they become larger, take on
more weight and density. Speaking,
just naming a thing, often creates perspective.
Touch, as you said, is a largely
unexplored and undocumented sense. I
have the idea that we, as dancers and
improvisors, are ambassadors to the
world of the body As a thinking■ dancer,
I strongly believe that I have a duty to
articulate my experience. 

---------------------

BETWEEN US (poem)
by Lori b


in the bowl
of our double-w ide hip circles
i sm ell an im possibly ripe Chinese m elon,
a green w hich will not be described.
(i will try) a glaze perhaps
but delicate as dew and twice as wet.
the color liquefies upon contact, a spinning sphere of water
falling in.
the weight of our melon, utterly round
echoing return, marble motion down a smooth slanted trough,
back and again, back and again, to begin and begin and begin again:
the step of two
the clatter of bone the hum of yes the flash of heat
the press of flesh the music of wanting
the breath of always in a grain of now.
greet the morning,
our fruit in thick slices,
slow sticky rivers
bear us into day.

---------------------

WHY TALK (DANCE, PAINT) ABOUT SEX?
by Jess Curtis

view from a dancemaker and teacher
I co-direct 848 Community Space
in San Francisco. Over the last
four years, we have presented a wide
range of community-based art events at
848 including dance, performance art,
improvisation, music and visual art
shows on a variety of topics. Along
the way, we have gained a reputation
for presenting a lot of sexually oriented
art, workshops and community events.
I’m also a choreographer whose
latest show is entitled Sex and Gravity.
As a result, I have found myself in a
number of conversations recently with
other artists, particularly dancers and
improvisers, who ask me, “Why do you
need to be so out with sex in your art,
why can't you just let sex be a private
thing?”
First, let me say that I have made
a lot of art about a lot of things. My
perception is that I have merely allowed
sex to exist among my choices
of what to make art from, while some
of my colleagues exclude sexual information
from their potential palettes. I
have made as much work about my relation
to spirit as my relation to sex. It
is my experience that, in America, to
speak in public about your sexuality in
the way you might speak about any
other part of your life brands you a sex
radical. Having said that, I will also
say that I believe that the web of experiences
and behaviors that we call sexuality
is one of the central driving
forces in our embodied existence.
I believe that the repression of our
sexualities, the lack of accurate and
accessible information about sex, and
the inability of most adults in our culture
to frankly and openly discuss their
sexuality are some of the greatest
causes of violence, disease and death in
our culture. Four times more San
Franciscans have died of AIDS in the
last fifteen years than the number of
San Franciscans that have died in all
the wars in this century. While almost
every person who reads this will know
someone who has died of AIDS, and
likely not know anyone who has died
in a war, many progressive adults will
find it easy to boycott a mega-corpora-
tion because of their support of global
warfare but will find it difficult to practice
safe sex. I believe that more frank
and open discussion about sexuality
and more images that challenge us to
address issues around our sexuality
will save lives.
I watch as friends are psychically
battered by emotionally unsafe relationships,
due largely to the fact that
they are unable to accurately communicate
with their partners about what they
want, feel, and actually do sexually.
The discussions I have had in public
forums about sexuality have directly
enabled me to more clearly communicate
my desires, fears and boundaries
in all my relations that involve physical
intimacy.
In several states of the United
States, sexual acts that I practice on a
regular basis are still illegal. Until it is
not a crime to love who you want how
you want, I will continue to make work
that challenges that reality.
My agenda in the making of art
includes affecting change in society
and in the bodies and minds of the people
who come to see what I make. I
experience sexual energy as the most
powerful and frequently occuring energy
in the body. I find it to be a most
useful tool. I had very little clear information
about my sexuality and
almost no forum for actually discussing
it until I moved to San Francisco. The
change in my own sexual/relational experience
since I have had lots of good
information and lively public discourse
has been profound.
I believe that in America we have
been handed a body-hating legacy of
secrecy and shame around our sexuality
and that this legacy is responsible for
most of the sexual abuse and rape in
our communities. Gay teens are the
largest percentage of teen suicides.
Over 25% of American women report
being sexually abused by a family
member. The privacy of our homes
and intimate conversations are not adequate
channels for the passing on of
information and training around our
sexual behaviors. They are failing us.
I believe we have a responsibility to
bring sexual information and discovery
back into community space.
I do not believe that it is accidental
that the fundamentalist ideologues
who seek to control all of our lives,
outlaw abortion, abolish affirmative action,
and put queers in jail have made it
a primary goal to attack and eradicate
sexually explicit art, especially from
queer and feminist artists. Clearly, they
understand the power that sexually
subversive imagery has in undermining
their takeover of our bodies.
The Forgotten Body System
In addition to having an agenda
for discussing sexuality publicly and
including images with sexual content
in my work as a performer, I believe
that it is important to address sexuality
in my work as a teacher.
I remember as I was learning Contact
Improvisation, having the realization
that this was potentially really
sexy, and being fairly confused about
the appropriateness of those feelings
while dancing with someone. While
my teachers often presented very subtle
information about the effect of many
body systems (skeletal, muscular, fluids,
etc.) on my dancing and my connection
to my partners, no one ever addressed
my reproductive system and its
very tangible effects on and responses
to moving in extended, close contact
with another human. Occasionally my
asshole (I know that’s not reproductive,
but it’s “down there”) was acknowledged
in class as something I could
relax, my cock and balls something
that I could feel the weight of, but the
hormones produced by them and the
physical and social effects of those hormones
remained unaddressed.
Conversely, I found that as I started
taking workshops that specifically
addressed sexuality and erotic interaction
(from people like Joseph Kramer,
Annie Sprinkle, and the Body Electric
School), there was a lack of understanding
of the weight of the body.
Touch was limited to hands touching a
more or less passive partner, and most
of the motion taught was from the
elbow down. Of course, most of these
teachers were working from a mas-
sage/bodywork model, but I found myself
chomping at the bit to teach a little
weight sharing in those contexts.
What I took away from those erotic
workshops that was of great value
was a whole bunch of clear thinking,
language and exercises regarding the
act of engaging in cooperative, consensual
pleasuring of each other. I actually
had teachers asking me to experience
my pleasure, own it as mine,
enjoy it fully, and then take very careful
responsibility for any action I might
take in relation to it. I got to practice
asking for exactly what I wanted, without
shame, whether what I wanted was
more interaction or less. I experienced
playing in a space where I could experience
the pleasure of my “dances”
fully because I could be confident that
my partners would let me know if
something other than what they wanted
was going on.
"BoneSex"
In the last two years, I’ve made a
number of experiments bringing together
information and experience
from the Contact Improv/Body-based
Art world and the Sex Positive/Body
Activist world. I’ve begun using exercises
that address sexual boundaries in
most of my Contact classes; I taught a
mini-Contact workshop at Body Electric’s
Cosmic Orgasm Summer Intensive
last year; and my partner
Stephanie Maher and I have developed
a workshop we call “BoneSex: the
Erotic Body, Deep Touch, Weight and
Motion.”
In this workshop, we’ve been
working with basic principles of Cl—
released weight, weight sharing, body
listening—but we’ve used them in a
context of invoking sensual/sexual
pleasure and interaction. We put a lot
of attention into de-focalizing the genitals
as the main area of sexual pleasure
while invoking the bones, skin, muscles
and organs. The workshop is
taught clothed, although we have ended
the workshop twice with the option of
wearing only underwear.
Our workshops are open to both
men and women, and we specifically
ask that everyone in the room be willing
to work with both genders. Most
of the erotic work I have experienced
has come out of the gay community
and has been only for men. There are
now also women doing erotic work for
women. There are very few people,
however, doing this work with mixed
groups where people aren’t required to
come as couples. One of the concerns
we had when deciding to work in
mixed-gender groups was the issue of
everyone feeling safe. We found that
by limiting the work to people willing
to work with both genders we minimized
a certain dynamic of objectification.
I wonder if the discomfort many
people feel around sexual energy in
dance circles is not largely related to a
fixed gender dynamic rooted in predatory
heterosexual models.
We’ve mostly directed this work
toward the more sex-based community,
by using mailing lists from sexuality-
oriented groups. There, we’ve found
that the principles of Contact can create
much more satisfying, whole-body
erotic experiences. (Most people reading
CQ have probably already experienced
that in their personal lives.) Recently,
we taught the workshop in conjunction
with performances at Highways
performance space in Los Angeles.
We put out a wider range of publicity
and had a blend of people from
both art and sex circles. We intend to
try this work soon in a more Contact-
based community. I am curious about
how the intentional invocation of pleasure
and sexual energy will affect
dances in a more dance-focused space.

A Simple Boundary Exercise
One of the most difficult things in
the arena of physical interaction is
telling someone that I don’t want them
to touch me or dance with me in a particular
way. Rejection hurts. None of
us wants to hurt someone else. Consequently,
I either put up with being
touched in ways I don’t feel totally
comfortable with, or I completely
avoid people that invade my boundaries.
I don’t think that either of these
is a great solution.
I’ve adapted a simple exercise
from my experiences in sex workshops
with queer sex educators Jack Davis
and Keith Hennessy, and with Chester
Mainard from the Body Electric School
of Erotic Massage, that has been very
useful to me in getting better at clarifying
my boundaries when playing or
dancing with someone. I use it now in
many classes I teach.
The exercise is this: Divide the
class in half. Students stand in two circles,
one circle facing in, one circle
facing out. Have everyone spend a
moment looking across at their partner.
Partners pace their breath together
while making eye contact. From here
I proceed to guide the class through a
series of simple, short (30 seconds to a
minute each), very specific interactions
ranging from touching fingertips to
placing your right hand on your own
heart and your left over the hand your
partner has on their heart. After each
interaction, the partners acknowledge
each other with a small bow and move
left or right around the circle to the
next partner. It’s important that the interactions
be very specifically guided,
and I usually limit the contact in this to
hands touching hands, arms, shoulders
and head.
After a bit, I suggest that they let
themselves have the warmest feelings
they can for the person across from
them. They can allow that person to
stand in for the people that they care
about in their life. It’s amazing how
accessible good feelings can be while
making eye contact and breathing together.
I find that I can pretend that I
really like almost anyone in this limited
context and that my physical experience
of “pretending” to have warm
emotional feelings for them is nearly
indistinguishable from the physical experience
of really knowing and liking
someone. Again I ask people to acknowledge
their partner with a small
bow and move around the circle to the
next person.
Now I ask one of the partners to
reach across and touch the arm of the
other. I ask the second person to remain
in eye contact, continue to feel as
connected as they can, and gently remove
the first partner’s hand from their
own arm saying, “No thanks, that’s not
what I want right now.” This almost
always gets a laugh from everyone. I
believe that the laugh is the release of
the truly uncomfortable energy most of
us feel around making a boundary, rejecting
someone and acknowledging
that something “bad” or sexual might
have just happened. I keep rotating the
circle and asking people to interrupt
very innocent forms of contact with the
phrase “No thanks, that’s not what I
want right now.” Some people will
have a very difficult time ever saying it
without laughing, but I ask them to say
it even if it’s not true, just to notice the
feelings that come up while saying it
and while hearing it said to them.
As you can imagine, there are any
number of variations you can play with
this. Sometimes I’ll ask people to improvise
a couple of rounds with one
partner initiating touch and the other
clarifying or fabricating boundaries. I
may work a bit with students pro-actively,
asking for the kind of contact
they do want and the responder making
the boundaries. I may do variations
where the communication is nonverbal
but no less communicative, or where
the contact is coming from an unknown
source. I encourage people to lie, make
fake boundaries, or make boundaries
based on frivolous whims. I suggest to
them the possibility of experimenting
with relaxing a boundary here or there
as well.
Some of the benefits of this
exercise are:
1) Just forming the words “No
thanks, that’s not what I want right
now.” This is a good sentence that offers
no blame, is polite but clear, especially
when accompanied by a gentle
hand interrupting the unwanted contact.
I have personally used the phrase when
I felt totally paralyzed by awkwardness.
Just having that sentence in the
muscle memory of my mouth allowed
me to gracefully interrupt contact I was
not enjoying.
2) Practicing the act of making
a boundary without breaking the collaborative
connection. The idea is to
clarify a boundary, give information, so
that we can share the richest contact
possible for each of us. It is much easier
to make a boundary, and to hear a
boundary when it’s the specific act that
is being blocked and not the entire person.
Too often we wait to describe our
desires and fears around contact until
we are already alienated, and the result
is an end to the contact. Defensiveness,
withdrawal and shame do not promote
effective communication. If we describe
our desires within a context of
collaboration, we are more likely to
communicate successfully in all aspects
of creating the dances we each want.
3) De-sensitizing the touch-initiating
partner to the stigma of being
told “no.” The clarification of boundaries
should be a simple act of communication,
not a self-esteem issue. Asking
people to notice their feelings in
this fairly artificial interaction can be
really illuminating. I notice the residue
of shame attached to being asked not to
touch. I find that repetition of the exercise
makes it more simple to hear (and
say) “No thanks.”
4) I want people to know that
their boundaries can shift, that they
don’t need to justify them. How I want
to contact you today may not be how I
want to tomorrow.
5) Practicing listening for
boundary-making and learning to go
slowly when approaching questionable
territory. This is a good principle
whether you’re giving weight to someone
or rolling your head on the front of
their pelvis.
6) Speaking more and sooner,
getting in the habit of signaling the approach
of a boundary rather than feeling
alienated by the transgression of
one.
7) Breaking through the taboo
against speaking frankly about sexual
material.

I hope that by having the opportunity
to practice communicating boundaries
in my classes, my students have
felt more free to get on with the business
of dancing together and that they
leave my class with tools for creating
the most enjoyable and clear forms of
connectedness possible in their dancing.
I continue to have questions about
how and when we are served by identifying
the pleasure we experience in
Contact Improvisation as sexual. Do
we keep the dance safe by not even
mentioning its potential relationship to
sex? Do we, in fact, “invoke” sexuality
and invite confusion into the dance
when we refer to it? Can we, as Steve
Paxton said [in CQ 20:1], enable the
form “to re-identify touch in a manner
so innocent and righteous that it can
fairly transcend taboo”? Or do we
need to acknowledge that all of our
physical contact is potentially sexual
and use care in our dancing and teaching
to develop tools to ensure that it’s
always safe and consensual? 

---------------------

speaking of boundaries...

I stopped going to contact jams
for two years. It was a time in my life
that I wanted to have clarity in my relationships,
both inside and outside the
dance studio. I had been having
dances that buzzed with sexual energy.
Was I putting something out there that
was causing this? Were my contact
partners bringing their sexual selves
into the dance? Were they feeling this
too? Were we making a connection together
that included sexual undercurrents?
At different times all these scenarios
seemed to be true. The most stifling
part of these dances was my discomfort
discussing what I was feeling.
Tired of this ambiguity and my silence,
I stopped going to jams. I didn’t want
contact jams being the place where my
sexuality was acted out. Now looking
back I realize I was equating lack of
boundaries and courage to “say it like
it was” with being a sensitive dancer—
the boundaries and courage that for me
would have made a safe environment
in which I could dance fully. Safety in
contact dancing for me is recognizing
that I have choices, choosing when I
want to dance, when I don’t, when to
talk, when to stop. One of the reasons
why I love contact is that I have these
choices. These days, dances are fun,
awkward, luscious, bumpy, goofy, sensuous,
playful, short, etc.... When my
dance partner and I are trusting our instincts
and not doubting our bodies’
brilliance, the possibilities in a dance
seem endless.

by Anonymous


---------------------

WHAT KIND OF TOUCH IS THIS?

by Tom Truss

Stimulation is stimulation. Acting
on stimulation is a whole other thing.
Often I have gotten aroused (i.e., slight
erection) when dancing with a man that
I find attractive. What happens is my
brain and body listen more to the sex
talk that’s happening inside of me instead
of the dance that’s occurring with
my partner. It pulls me away from the
experience and begins to change the
intent of our connection.
That is why I dance with women,
and men who don’t turn me on. With
them, the ingredients of sex, attraction,
and romance are not a part of the equation,
allowing our dance to be the
focus. And until I’m able to distinguish
between physical contact with
cute boys where our intent is sexing,
and physical contact with cute boys
where our intent is making art, I’ll
keep dancing with women, and men
who don’t turn me on.
There are many other reasons why
I end up dancing with someone. Such
as: the way they move, I can learn
from them, I feel safe with them, I
want to meet them, they’re bigger than
me, they’re smaller than me, I haven’t
seen them in a while, they’re beginners,
they came to me, I want to be
touched. Reasons for not dancing with
some folks: the way they move, I can
learn from them, I feel safe with them,
I want to meet them, they’re bigger
than me, they’re smaller than me, I
haven’t seen them in a while, they’re
beginners, they came to me, I want to
be touched.
Which makes me think, “What kind
of touch is this?” In a world of violent
touch, medicinal touch, polite touch,
sex touch, aggressive touch, caring
touch, it can be confusing to encounter
a touch that can be all of the above and
more. What is the touch of body on
body when dancing, and how is that
similar and different from body on
body when sexing?
I remember, after one incredible
dance, wanting to turn to my partner
and say, “I love you.” We had visited a
lot of terrain in that dance. Our improv
was rich with story, time, truth; so,
while lying on the floor next to each
other, the phrase “I love you” was on
my lips. But that didn’t make sense.
Yes, I loved our dance, and I loved that
we went that far while dancing, but I
didn’t even know her name. Besides,
I’m queer! It was quite a confusing
moment.
Knowing where the feeling is coming
from is important. That dance was
like a marriage, a Hallmark card, and a
prayer combined. It brought up memories,
feelings, and history without any
of the places, people, and objects being
there. And yet my emotions were totally
present, and I wanted to relate
with my current live dance partner the
way I would have with the people who
were involved in those past moments.
So “I love you” was resting right on
my tongue, and fortunately, there it it
stayed.
It’s about being clear. This touch is
soft, strong, gentle, feels good, and yes
your face just slid across my crotch,
and my foot is almost up your butt, our
breasts are touching and your warm
breath is hitting that spot that makes
my groin tingle, yet this is not where I
want to express my sex self. Oftentimes
the touch feels like that of a
teammate. We are headed for a common
goal, dancing. I suppose it really
doesn’t matter what the goal is, as long
as it’s mutually agreed upon.
I’m reminded of the term ‘mutual
masturbation’. It’s one of those pop
language phrases spawned from ‘safe
sex’ that I like. I like it for three reasons:
1) it feels good; 2) the alliteration;
and 3) most importantly, it speaks
of something shared. The best dances
I’ve had have always included those
three elements—it feels good, alliteration
(the movement metaphor for me
would be a mindfulness to the way I’m
moving—playful, soft, smooth, strong,
etc., and how that affects the dance)
and most importantly, it speaks of
something shared. I like dances that
are mutual—that are bom from a common
denominator, and from communication.
Where all the parties involved
say, “I’m tired, I need to go slowly.”
Or, the nonverbal, I-want-to-jump,-
play,-fly,-yeehaw dance! Plus all the
other dances in between.
I must admit I’ve yet to have a mutual
let’s-flirt-and-play-with-our-libidos
dance. Actually that’s not true... I
have them in clubs, at parties, in my
bedroom, in fact just about everywhere
except the studio. I suspect that’s because
it feels right to have the sex
dance in those places, but not at a jam.
So what do I do when I’m dancing and
it begins to feel like sexing? I notice it,
and then I don’t act on it. If it begins
to inform the dance more than the
dance is, then I stop. Stimulation is
stimulation, acting on it is a whole
other thing. 

---------------------

PERSONAL BOUNDARIES IN CONTACT
by Joanna Cashman

What are healthy personal boundaries
and how can we maintain them in
the context of Contact Improvisation?
Over the years I have given myself different
and sometimes contradictory answers
to this question. I have participated
in numerous jams across the
United States and in Canada and I have
had many discussions with Contact
people of both sexes on this topic. At
one point I felt comfortable with a set
of ground rules that seemed to work for
me and give me a sense of clarity and
personal safety. Then life presented me
with circumstances that turned my
ground rules upside down and stimulated
some very different ways of responding.
My ground is in flux in
keeping with the spirit of Contact.
In my work as a chemical dependency
nurse/expressive arts therapist,
an awareness of healthy boundaries is
crucial to the well-being of both client
and counselor. Maintaining clear and
ethical boundaries supports the recovery
process. In discussions with massage
therapists on this topic I have
learned that they are guided by ethical
considerations related to quality of
touch as they refine the tactile channel
of communication to maximize the
therapeutic impact of their work. An
ethical massage therapist does not
channel seductive sexual energy
through his/her touch. To do so would
be to betray the foundation of trust that
the therapeutic relationship is based on.
Obviously, therapeutic massage is not
an appropriate context for making erotic
connections and is not used as covert
sexual foreplay. Do these distinctions
in quality of touch have relevance to
the practice of Contact Improvisation?
What ethical standards guide us in our
dancing with each other?
In the most basic sense, a boundary
for me is a self-created protective barrier
between myself and other people. It
is a process of establishing limits beyond
which I will not go and beyond
which others are not welcome. It is
how I ensure my personal safety and
maintain my integrity as a human
being, while maintaining a relatively
fair sense of give and take in relationships.
I have a right to change these
boundaries in keeping with my intuition
about any given situation. So
how do I participate in a Contact jam
with intact boundaries?
In the arena of Contact Improvisation
there is an assumed agreement that
we will endeavor to explore a form of
physical intimacy that is different from
sexual physical intimacy. I also assume
that we agree not to use Contact
to covertly gratify our sexual needs.
This unspoken rule is what makes it
safe for me to engage in the study of
our interpersonal language of touch,
weight and momentum. I agree to get
my sexual needs met elsewhere. I’m
familiar with sex. I experience Contact
as a different domain.
I do Contact to explore a whole
new universe of information and development
that only the physical dialogues
of this form can teach me. I
consider it part of the discipline to cultivate
a neutral, androgenous state of
mind. Yes, sexual thoughts and feelings
do occur, and when they do I acknowledge
them without judgment and
let them pass. I return to the physics at
hand and proceed from a neutral
ground of consciousness. If I can’t do
that, I know I need to be doing something
else about getting my sexual
needs met outside of the jam context
because those needs are getting in the
way of the work. These are the boundaries
I have adopted for myself.
A clear sign of when my boundaries
are not being respected is when I
feel violated or used when dancing
with someone. I have on occasion
picked up a subtle sense of having my
body used to fulfill needs of a sexual
nature. When I consent to dance, I am
not consenting to gratify sexual needs.
In Contact I choose to trust. I choose
to lower my “protective shield” and
blur my sense of physical boundaries to
explore the very exciting dynamics of
time, force, space, weight, and momentum.
I love the abstract physics of it. I
trust that my partner will not exploit
my willingness to explore.
I have a friend who is recovering
from a history of sexual abuse. She is
very selective about whom she will
dance with, as she is not comfortable
with the “molestation”-flavored energy
that she sometimes feels with Contact
partners. She wisely avoids getting retraumatized.
This is not elitism or
paranoia, it is wisdom and discernment.
I’m not sure how to name this
phenomenon but most of us know it
when we feel it. It is part of the shadow
side of Contact Improvisation. It is
a felt sense about the quality of relating
that occurs between two people of any
gender. Something just doesn’t feel
right. It often has to do with unclear
boundaries, unconscious needs, or
sloppy interpersonal ethics.
Once I attended a jam in a big city
that was new to me. The friend I was
with warned me not to dance with one
particular man that was there, implying
that he was a “sexual predator.” My
friend wanted me to have a good experience
at the jam and thought I might
feel uncomfortable dancing with him.
That was quite a harsh judgment, I
thought. Curious about his warning, I
spent some time observing this man
dance and sure enough that creepy feeling
came over me as I watched him
dancing with a young woman. He
managed to have face to breast, face to
pelvis, and hand to breast contact more
frequently than the physics and flow of
the dance would naturally require. I
felt uncomfortable watching. It
appeared to me that an unconscious
agenda was guiding him along the terrain
of the woman’s body, placing him
strategically. And when my male
friend left the jam briefly, the person in
question quickly moved in, inviting me
to dance. I politely declined, discerning
that he was not an appropriate partner
for me.
I imagine his awareness would improve
if his partner had said, “I felt uncomfortable
dancing with you,” and
opened up an opportunity for communication
about why that was. Why
don’t we say this? Why don’t we name
it when we feel it? Is it because we
don’t trust our perceptions? What are
we afraid of? Is it the fear that our
partners will tell us we’re crazy and it’s
all in our imagination? Possibly, but so
what? If the message is expressed frequently
enough, individuals will either
become more aware and behave more
appropriately, or they will select themselves
out of the community. So be it!
Let’s say what has to be said to cultivate
a safe environment in which to explore
Contact Improvisation. I know
women who have dropped out of the
Contact community because of
experiences like this. Obviously,
if we want to explore our sexuality,
there are more appropriate and
honest ways of going about it
without muddling up the Contact
climate.
Now to flip the coin of paradox
and contradict what I have just
said, I would like to relate another
story of dance, sex, gender. In
1987,1 was performing dance
improvisation in the former Soviet
Union on an Arts for Peace
Tour arranged by the Tucson
Center for American-Soviet Initiatives.
In between dances, my
Ukrainian friend Natasha told me
there was a man in the audience
who wanted to perform with me.
She took me to a large hallway
where Sergei stood smiling, barechested.
Natasha introduced us
and left. Sergei and I fumbled
with a few broken words of English
and Russian, but our language skills
were ridiculous. So we started dancing
improvisationally. At first we were
seemingly incompatible movers, different
as night and day. I was doing all
this abstract movement-for-move-
ment’s-sake stuff and he was doing
passionate dance drama like out of the
1940s school of Martha Graham.
But we slowly found a balance, a
common ground of sorts, and after
about thirty minutes we went onstage
and performed a wild and wonderful
improvised dance. We found a meeting
ground somewhere in between our inherent
tendencies. Someone asked us
how long we had been performing together,
assuming that he was my American
dance partner. It was magic. The
universal language of dance had allowed
us to communicate across culture and
language barriers.
It is important to note that the universal
languages of sexuality and
humor also played a role in our success.
Our brief rehearsal was spiced by
a moment in which Sergei lifted me
overhead, slid me down the front of his
bare chest and initiated a rather passionate
kiss. I burst into laughter and
we tumbled to the floor both laughing
at the comedy of the situation. Was
this a boundary violation or a spontaneous
moment of interpersonal risktaking?
I experienced it as the latter in
that setting. My experience was colored
by the fact that he was a handsome,
charming individual and I was in
an unfamiliar and exotic country.
How would I have responded, I
wonder, if I had not found him attractive?
What happened to all my well-
thought-out boundary politics? Gone
with the wind, I would say. Human
frailty waxing transparent, as I improvised
my way through unexpected circumstances,
finding myself being inconsistent
with my so-called ideals.
We saw a lot of each other on that
tour. We performed together many
times in Kiev. The romance that ensued
resulted in my return trip to the
Ukraine on a one-month residency to
teach American Modem Dance at
Schevchenko University where I produced
an American-Soviet Concert of
Modem Dance. This was a very exciting
time in Soviet history. The policies
of glasnost and peristroika under
Mikhail Gorbachev’s leadership were
opening doors of expression and creativity
that had been closed since Stalin’s
policies of “Soviet Realism.”
Stalin dictated that themes involving
eroticism, mysticism and any truthful
depictions of the adversities of
Soviet life were illegal topics for artistic
expression. To censure these elements
makes for some very bland art. You
can imagine the extraordinary explosion
of creativity as the floodgates
opened with new political policies that
supported artistic freedom. According
to the Ukrainians, Modem Dance had
not been taught or performed in Kiev
since Isadora Duncan, and Americans
were not previously allowed to stay
overnight at a Soviet’s home without
being a blood relative. I was honored
to be there, and the dancers I worked
with were very eager to learn about
American Modem Dance technique
and choreography. They purchased
two of my works for inclusion in their
repertory. So, to say the least, this was
a very exciting time to be an American
artist in the Soviet Union. Magic was
afoot and I had the adventure of my life.
Had Sergei been politically correct
and respectful of my boundaries, I may
have missed a very exciting and important
chapter of my personal history. In
addition, the ill-fated long distance
relationship was a vehicle for much
learning and personal growth. I would
not have wanted to miss any of it.
Sergei took a risk, and in that culture
and setting it worked. If someone had
tried that move with me in the context
of a Contact jam, I would have experienced
it differently and would have felt
offended. Sometimes destiny has its
own agenda, and we are guided to live
life outside our own rules to get all the
juice out of this great journey. I guess
that’s what is meant by having flexible
boundaries.
Exploring and expressing our true
feelings will shed more light on the
issue of personal boundaries, and will
promote the creation of safe environments
in which to explore Contact Improvisation,
without drying up our
creative juices and sense of humor.
We walk a narrow path, aligning and
re-aligning with a value system that is
itself in a state of flux.
I wonder how other Contact
dancers have dealt with these issues. I
welcome any responses or comments
to the thoughts and feelings I have
shared. I am especially interested in
hearing how other women have dealt
with the challenges of being female
within an art form based on physical
intimacy. Contact Improvisation is a
brave area of inquiry that few choose
to venture into. No simple task, given
the complexity and multi-dimensionality
of the human experience. I
applaud us all.

--------------------

Study Lab on Cl & Sexuality 

by Jackie Adkins, Dieter Heitkamp, Zjamal Xanitha, Weijke Koopmans


One of the topics to emerge quickly
at the 10th European Contact Conference
in Amsterdam was that of contact
and sexuality. The study lab which met
to explore the issue was a large group,
20 to 25 people. This proved problematic
for getting a cohesive or fruitful
dialogue going, as there were so many
diverse points of view on what the
agenda for such a discussion should be.
In the hour and a half of talking that
ensued, however, what did emerge was
the feeling that while the question of
sexuality had never been explicitly part
of the development of teaching the
form, there was a growing interest in
exploring the possibilities of the subject.
This was despite the fact that, for
some, the attraction of contact improvisation
had originally been the neutralizing
of gender and sexuality. For others,
this was the opposite.
There followed some talk about the
relationship between sexual energy and
dancing energy, and the possibility of
transforming the former into the latter.
It seemed that as Cl is a sensual form,
that there must inevitably be a continuum
between what feels good sensually
and sexual sensations.

Issues that came up during this
meeting were:
• fear of intimacy
• how to address contact and
sexuality in class
• sexual oppression/violence
• boundaries—when we need them
and when we don’t
• touch
• dispersing sexual energy throughout
the body
• pleasure
• breathing/charging, containing
the energy
• sexual vocabulary—use of terms,
e.g., heat
• performance interpretation
beyond the love stereotype
• heart connection
• re-establishing personal space—
is personal space neutral?
• listening and limits—assumptions
about limits
• connecting into sexual energy
and the work of Mantak Chia
• students falling in love with
teachers
It was pointed out that two distinct
areas were emerging: 1) the desire of
experienced contactors to explore their
own responses to sexuality, and, 2) approaching
the issue from the teacher’s
point of view.
The talk was followed by a jam.
For the next day, two study labs were
set up, one dealing with contact and
sexual energy, the other with teaching
safe boundaries.

In the study lab “Contact and Sexual
Energy: Breathing, Charging and
Transforming” that met the next evening,
we started with a negation: “This
session is not about: sexual politics,
gender issues, teaching issues, how to
set boundaries. It is about using the
full range of body landscapes, touch,
self-touch, skin, excitement, enjoying
oneself, allowance and permission.”
The attic studio was lit only by candlelight.
After a short talk, we began with
a sex-party ritual, where you practice
saying “no” to being touched. Sexual
energy was initiated by doing tantric
exercises: activating pelvis breathing
and rocking. Permission was given to
express our pleasure in this by sounding
and touching ourselves. This state
was extended into solo dancing, then
making contact, flowing into different
configurations. We practiced charging,
building the heat within our dancing, and
not diffusing that intensity. The atmosphere
in the room was one of tenderness,
eroticism, unlimited possibility,
trust. There was movement and stillness,
rushing energy, lingering attention,
and playfulness.
In moving and dancing this way for
two hours, we experienced the difference
of sensing the body not only as a
leverage place or a supporting surface,
but as sensual, alive, round, with all its
distinct forms, feelings and textures. It
brought back feeling and emotional
content into the dancing and touching.
We could share with others the sexual
tenderness and beauty we experience
with our lovers. We found the freedom
of full-bloodedly doing that which is
normally neutralized and forbidden.
Afterwards, we took some time to
be still, alone, and write.
Additional notes from Katy Dymoke:
The comic thing about the Sexuality
and Contact study lab was the willingness
to talk and reveal, and then when
we danced, there was an uncanny sense
of “avoidance”!
Dieter and five others created a
showing which was poetic—integrating
thought and being, image and colour,
presence and presentation. My joy in
this event was the clarity of seeing sexuality
as integral to oneself—hard to
clarify but easily “sensed,” often with
volatile feelings associated with it. But
phlegmatic as I am, I enjoy both sides/
extremes—sensing deep, slow, and
fire/air-y fast energy levels. I am my
sexuality, my sexuality is me. I can
share it when it is aroused and act with
its energy when the occasion is right,
re-direct or transform the energy for it
to be useful when my body is expressing
my being in the moment. 

-------------------

TOUCH REVOLUTION giving dance
by Karen Nelson

Contact is a Touch Revolution. It's a revolution against the tyranny of nontouch.
It's a politic of movement from the inside out, organizing to break the
code of space and distance between people. We know of a lover's touch, or family
and friend's touch, but the touch of a virtual stranger is left to chance brushes in
crowded places, like the palm of my hand where the fingertips of the cashier delivers
change for my dollar. Engaging in a dance and taking the opportunity to wake up
my senses, to sweeten my skin in all the nooks and crannies of a person whose name
I do or do not know, to smell their clothing, to share their sweat, to have no relationship
other than this moment of shared movement in a non-sexual context, is to
change the face of social being-togetherness.
Contact users are revolutionaries. We train in the arts of touching the floor and of
uniting with the forces of the Earth. We feel our bodies. We touch others. We
move our masses; we feed the touch-deprived, the trust-hungry, the momentum
addicts, the love/sex/touch-confused. We learn to take nurturing touch. We learn
to allow our bodies to be supported, perhaps for the first time since childhood. We
learn to give the center of our weight to another human. We decide to open ourselves
through curiosity, sensuality, emotionality, physicality. Body tissues soften and
relax. Defenses come down. We open up. We transform hate and fear. We share
moments of creation. We give physical gifts of imagination, information, invitations,
ideas, opportunities, instruction and communication. We take intuitive measures.
We give dance.

I am touching you and touching me, the interface of activity. When I touch you, am I
touching you or myself? I can focus on touching myself, using your body as an environment.
I can focus on touching you, on touching the shape and texture of you. I can
touch the shape and texture of myself. I can read you with my eyes closed. I can see
how big you are, touch your volume and I can find your softnesses. I can focus on
touching myself and be using you for the purpose of feeling my edges, my surfaces, my
skin, muscle and skeleton, my size and my shape.
We are dancing. We are using friction against each other. I am tuning into your timing
in order to counter it, to move in the opposite direction. Heat from our bodies
smoothes and softens our crusty edges. I can feel your bony surfaces. I am stretching
into the moving rhythm, finding long strokes on the side seams of my body, massaging
muscle layers of myself, using your surface, and you are also massaging layers of yourself
against me. The surfaces begin to change; we allow the area of touch to travel to other
parts of our bodies. We are following the continuous surface of our skin without any
concern for symmetry. Each of us is on our own journey, landscaping and inhabiting the
miles of our continuous containing skin. We render all surfaces equal, coating ourselves
with sensation...getting lost in sensation, finding the passion of the image. Inside my
body I am stretching, creating resistance to meet your energy. We shift into squeezing,
pressing, and pulling on each other. We are so physical, our dance creates warmth,
energy and a playful mood. We permit each other to hug and squeeze with arms and
legs; pressing and using our muscles, we are engaging and stimulating ourselves. We
release and fall and rise again, riding with the flow of energy, finding the place of not
knowing. We surprise each other.
We were dancing, you had closed your eyes, I was to keep mine open. This was our
score. There came a moment when it was possible for me to lift the full extended
length of your weight onto the back of my hips. So I did. You laughed, and I assumed
you were surprised to have been taken, so easily. After that moment, your touch towards
me changed; you reached for me, for my surfaces, for my strength to support your balance.
Your skin was looking for places to nudge into, to follow with bigger pieces of
weight and your well-protected center. That bonding, confidence, stimulated both of
our appetites for more carries and full-body supports which we found and followed with
ease.
"Go down on me," I implored and you proceeded to slide your hand then arm, then
surface of your back, then other shoulder, arm, hand...down my thigh, looking into my
face as you descended to the floor landing flat on your back, your fall cushioned by the
upward reaching support of your arms and hands which had traveled, sliding down the
full length of the front surfaces of my standing body.
We were told to find a partner. I was glad to see you linger in my direction. I was ready
to finally meet you too. I'd had a satisfying warm up and I knew you were nearby. I'd
discovered that in a beautiful way. I saw your shape in my peripheral vision, you were
right in the middle of my view. I was immediately attracted to your size and I almost
brought my eyes into focus to see who you were; but sweetly enough somehow I managed
to discipline myself to stay in a soft undefined focus, just noticing your tall and
inviting shape not far from me when suddenly I recognized you and felt, yes, I am ready
to dance with you...at that moment the teacher said: find a partner. I was glad to see
you linger in my direction.
You lay on the floor on your belly, looking asleep. I touch you as if for the first time,
my hand feels very small on you. I begin to rock you gently, feeling into the wholeness
of you. I am delighted to meet you this way, to show you my ways of touching. I wonder
how comfortable you are in your passive role as I begin to drape myself over you,
our breaths connecting, immediately corresponding; you fill me and I ride you, blending
rhythms. I start to roll up your length to massage you and I feel a deep security in your
size, a knowing that you can hold me, that you are so strong you can carry me infinitely.
We begin moving together, you are like a life raft which will carry me long distances. 


--------------------

LOVE & SEX TOUCH & WEIGHT

by Keith Hennessy 

1. I had a recurring desire during adolescence to
attend a school where I could learn to have sex
with women. I remember telling my sister years
later that with my next lover I would request a period of
mutual education about our bodies. At some point during
my first series of Contact Improv classes in Montreal in
1979,1 recalled my desire for sex school. Through dancing,
especially Contact, my conscious sexuality began to
emerge. I declared that all future lovers would be familiar
with Contact. I would teach them the basics if needed.

2. I am a political animal. I notice and sometimes
justify my activities in relation to r/evolutionary
goals. From the start I was in love with what
my friends and I identified as “the feminist and bisexual
aesthetics” of Contact Improvisation. Our dancing supported
an ongoing verbal orgy: “The personal is political. We
are no longer tied to gender-specific roles. We are learning
to touch and trust each other. Our bodies can teach our
minds to flow, to surrender, to release static ideology and
embrace fluid identities. Post-modern movement is radically
democratic—everyone’s a dancer. The dance is everywhere.
The^dance is jazz. Improvisation is freedom.” We
considered parties a failure if we couldn’t turn the dance
floor into a Contact jam.

3. My best friend and street performing partner
insisted I teach him to do Contact. We danced
three to six days a week for six months. I got a
hard-on for him every time. We pretended not to notice.
That’s over a hundred unacknowledged boners trying to
hide in baggy sweatpants.

4. Contact Improvisation, collaborative performance art, and
street protests have been primary community practices for my circle 
of friends for the past fifteen years. Pagan ritual became another core practice
about ten years ago. Over the past five years, group erotic
touch as practiced in intimacy workshops and sex rituals,
has emerged as the latest form of community bonding and
development.

5. In response to the lack of men in dance class,
 especially the modem classes I attended ten years
ago, I began to offer movement classes for men
and then instigated a few performances with all-male casts.
Armed with a beginner’s theory of male oppression, I
would teach that there were deep political reasons for European
and American men’s lack of flexibility—especially in
the pelvis (sexual oppression: see Wilhelm Reich) and the
ankles (spiritual oppression, alienation from the earth,
inability to kneel). I taught that Contact Improvisation was
what Reich, suffering from both political repression and
homophobia, could only dream of: a community-based
form of touch, whole body massage, and (sexual) energy
that could heal the alienation of totalitarian industrial culture.
For the most part I still believe this.

6. My studies in spirituality and politics continually
led me to the same basic lessons I had been
practicing in Contact Improvisation. I was not
surprised to discover that awareness and intention were key
principles/practices in learning to touch. Years ago I felt
that Contact had gifted me with new awareness and confidence
in my own sexuality. In my late twenties I had a second
sexual rebirth when I attended an “erotic, Taoist,
Reichian” sex workshop for gay men, taught by Joe
Kramer. In less than a year I was co-teaching, with Jack
Davis, my first sexual healing workshop for men. Other
than a couple of show ’n tell exercises I had been fantasizing
for half my life, my teaching consisted of introductory
Contact exercises done naked. After our first workshop,
Jack dedicated himself to dancing with men naked and
blindfolded.

7. After a couple of years of bringing the wisdom of
Contact to queer male sex spaces, I decided to
bring the wisdom of queer sexual healing to my
teaching of Contact. I offered a class at the West Coast
Contact Improv Festival called “Love & Sex, Touch &
Weight.” We kept our clothes on, but I discussed geni-
tal/breast/intimate touch and requested that participants
make explicit boundaries with each partner. The class was
hugely attended with most of us feeling both provoked and
pleased afterwards. I continue to explore these cross-fertilizations.
Recently I taught a five-day performance intensive
at the Omega Institute called “New Images of Sexual
Initiation.” Jess Curtis and Stephanie Maher, frequent collaborators
of mine, have developed a class they call “Bone-
Sex” which d/evolves into a clothing-optional dance space.

7. I have had many lovely dances—ecstatic, erotic,
intimate, fierce, playful—with men and women,
of several sexualities. I have had many dances
that were better than most of the sex I’ve had. I have
thought that Contact Improv could be listed as a sexual
preference on surveys. Yet, within this field of fluid identity,
I marvel at the strength of binary codes of gender and
sexuality that continually assert themselves. In Contact
jams and community events, as elsewhere, lines between
men and women are continually mapped and patrolled.
The queer dancers sometimes seek each other out, whispering
solidarity across a room with a glance. (There are so
few people of color, I’m not sure what postures or strategies
they might assume. This clearly needs more attention
and discussion.) Sexism, a basic challenge to any alternative
community, usually arises in the form of inappropriate
sexual touch, gaze, and dating tactics by straight men. In
this historic moment of heightened consciousness around
sexist and heterosexist abuse, many women, lesbians, and
gay men do not feel safe at open Contact jams. As a standard
practice I come out as queer at the end of my classes.
Usually one or more participants announce their non-heterosexuality,
and tell how glad they are to finally be “out”
in this environment.

9. When I walk into a room full of
Contact dancers, my queer-identified
self reads the room as
“straight.” Unlike most non-queer contexts,
this one is not unsafe for me. I have a long
history with the form, many favorite partners,
and a shared respect with many more.
I am very publicly gay and equally public
about my love for intense dancing.

10. Contact Improvisation
attracts people who fantasize
utopian social structures.
I often ask students to describe Contact
to me as if I had never seen it. Their
answers are inspired but disturbingly vague:
“Contact is freedom. It’s extreme intimacy.
Contact is total surrender to another person.
It’s energy.” Only a longtime practitioner
would butt in with something like, “Contact
is an improvisational duet dance form based
on maintaining a point of contact and shared
weight in motion.” Neither a sexy nor spiritual
description. What’s the connection
between the form and our associations with
it? There’s so much that is often left out in
the teaching of it: that sexual feelings may
arise; that cross-cultural techniques have
influenced the form; that Contact emerged
from a lineage of dance and art history; that
improvisation is a complex and compelling
process; that there is no sign over the door which says
“All who enter here are healed from the disastrous and
petty effects of sexism and other prejudices.” I’m a dancer
who thinks that these things should be talked about.

11. For three years, during high school, I danced
with a woman in Jitterbug and Disco dance
contests. We were never lovers, yet after seeing
us dance, people would call us liars if we denied it. I
have performed many intimate, Contact-based duets with
men whose primary sexual relations are with women.
Someone always asks if we are lovers. Many assume that
my male dancing partners are gay. When I perform Contact
with a woman, someone will usually comment on our surprising
intimacy. For the past six months I have been touring
with out-gay improvisers Patrick Scully and Ishmael
Houston-Jones. Oddly enough, though we interact very
intimately on stage, no one has ever asked if either man
was my lover.


----------------

s w e a t p a n t s g r o p e m y m e m o r y

“Before you can pry any secret
from me, you must first find
the real me. ”
Jean Harlow to Billy the Kid,
in Michael McClure’s Lion Love
“When we got into bed/onto the
dance floor, s/he turned
into somebody else... ”
Variant folk saying
“The body remembers.
“The body doesn’t lie.
“I like to lie in bed. ”
Dancers’ sayings



by Jerry Zientara
I used to think, wanted to believe,
that sex (making love) was ideally as
athletic, spontaneous, joyful and
strange as Contact Improvisation. Alas,
for me, most sex in my life has been
far less athletic, not so innovative, as
the “movement form” which rescued
me from early onset of torpor and dullness
in my early 30s. However, because
of this yearning, I have tended to
prefer somewhat wilder forms of erotic
play. And my idea/ideal still lives in
my imagination.
I used to think that contactors
would be more fun in bed than others
but, in my limited experience, I found
this not quite exactly true. In some
cases, it was as if exertions on the
dance floor compensated a languor or
lack of oomph between the sheets. A
partner notable for rapid movements,
verve and invention in sweatpants,
might become a cuddly slug in a skin-
to-skin situation. This is not to say I
have never met guys who were hot and
energetic all the time, but this has been
rare.
One reason Contact was so much
fun was that it elicited qualities of a
person not usually tapped; thus, elements
of personality ordinarily hidden
could come out in the dance, and shy,
dull wallflowers could blossom into
lithe, lovely and fragrant exotics
through the freedom of the flow, the
play of gravity and levity. The combination
of sweat and pheromones, the
adrenalin rush of the fight/flight mechanism,
among other factors, makes a
hormonal rebalance with many sorts of
possibilities fanning out.
In the old days, the late ’70s, we
used to talk about the essential chastity
of the form. It was agreed widely that
the form was not sexy in itself, since
one can hardly have a hard-on while
swooping through the air or rushing at
a moving target—the body protects itself
by “forgetting” sex while there is
physical danger present.
We also used to talk about the “gland
game.” I was never quite sure I understood
this part of the conversation. I
did understand a glandular appeal for
an audience watching real-time decision-making
in the dance. In theatre,
the audience likes especially those
moments when a character thinks
through an idea, comes to a realization.
In the Contact arena, the body/thought
process is continuous, providing the
audience with mental and glandular
thrills and excitement. Meanwhile, for
us, within the dance, the feelings might
be quite different. Glands are complex,
and more than just gonads. From
pineal to prostate, adrenal to thymus,
there is always plenty going on.
The attractions among people dancing
together might also be gland games.
Dancing was more fun, “better,” with
partners I was drawn to via romance or
erotic longings. As this was rarely the
case, I learnt to love movers for grace,
skill and fun, towards whom I felt no
sexual magnetism, and this has been a
good lesson for life.
Obviously, I’ve had sex partners
who could never manage an aikido roll,
who were perfectly fine for rolls in the
hay. While sex and Contact Improv
have much in common, they are not the
same. One may prove diagnostic for
the other; for instance, habitual moves
may point out lack of imagination, or
emotional clinging may show up physically.
Responsiveness, respect, playfulness,
among other elements you
could list, are essential in both good
loving and good moving.
At a gay men’s retreat in the redwoods
recently, I observed how happiness
may be a goal/byproduct of
Brownian movement. Guys trying to
walk across the campsite were constantly
diverted by conversations, visual
treats, more coffee or juice, hugs and
laughter; it could take twenty minutes
to get anywhere or nowhere at all. In
such an easygoing atmosphere, men
relaxed minds and hearts,
attaining an amoeboid
joy in a medium of abundant
touch. It reminded
me a lot of Contact. An
old pal, Gary, and I
talked there one evening about Contact.
His memories of seeing me and Buzz
(Bense) flying through the air years
ago had been stimulated by watching
us now, walking beneath the tall trees.
We spoke about how, now that I’m
older, I don’t spin around on my head
as much as I used to, but while I am
now more in the “walk” than the
“dance” of life, ideas of Contact are
still central to my sense of being, my
philosophy.
What we do is who we are—yes,
no, maybe. In studying sex, I have
come to other particles in my philosophy
given by teachers as gifted and inspired
as were my teachers of Contact.
I have learnt that I can sort out my own
erotic choices along the lines of Yes (I
want to do that), No (Never!) and Maybe
(Under certain identifiable circumstances),
in the same way I learnt to
watch for the moment of momentum,
the flow and the response within my
body. Jump? Run? Roll? Yes, no,
maybe...
I now know how to analyze behavior
according to the sociosexual response
cycle, ranging from non-sexual time
through vague stirrings, up to arousal,
plateau, orgasm, and refraction into the
“what next?” phase. It’s very like a
pattern in Contact we call: “the stand,”
the falling into play, the dance full-out,
the “end” and the afterglow. The psychic
and social phases of these interactions
can be seen as so similar as to enlighten
each other. Just as we lose ourselves in
the dance, we may also in sex/love-
making, attaining a greater energy
beyond our solo-ness. As we lose ourselves,
we may find a higher, or at
least other, way of being that nourishes
our deepest roots.

As a gay man, I have usually loved
my Contact partners chastely, no matter
their gender, hair color, or fashion
awareness. Some gay men have been
my greatest partners, like Saul—our
erotic and dance-sport selves enriching
the movement and our feelings, and
vice versa. Some men, gay or not, may
have been nervous about my orientation,
but danced full-out with me, and
had (I hope) as much fun as I did. In
such situations, the chastity of the form
allowed us to accept dance partners as
“merely” such, just human moving
bodies, inviting growth and new perspectives.
I see no conclusion to this ramble
of remarks and observations without an
intellectual goal. And so far I don’t
know how to weave in here the joke
phrase I so like: “Help! I’m standing
and I can’t get down!”
I leave it to you to list possible
conclusions, or beginnings. Radical
blessings and best wishes from your pal.
...WOOF! 
