----------------
EDITOR NOTE

You have just come within a hair’s
breadth of holding a magazine named
Contact Q in your hands. Though it
had its advantages (keeping the familiar
“Contact” and the useful “CQ” in play),
"Contact Q” failed to inspire, to imply
a future to grow into, a vision of not
only where we’ve come from but where
we are and are going to.
To be honest, if the word ‘Quarterly’
weren’t so inflexible in its interpretation,
so clearly inaccurate, and causing
us to receive daily calls and letters from
confused subscribers thinking they’re
missing an issue or two, we probably
wouldn’t be looking for a new name
just now. But it is, and we are.
However, pressed to do something,
we took a deep breath, and did nothing.
This was, in my opinion, a good thing
to do. Sometimes the only way to see
which way something is moving is to
keep still.
And so, for the moment, we remain
Contact Quarterly, a biannual journal of
contemporary dance, improvisation, and
movement arts, a vehicle for moving
ideas that has long since grown past its
initial production schedule and focus of
sharing news among Contact Improvisors
worldwide.
We have changed a name, however.
As of this issue, the CQ Newsletter has
become the Cl Newsletter. By making
our relationship to Contact Improvisation
evident—in the Newsletter, “Contacts”
listing, and “Still Moving” column—and
not merely assumed, we can
more clearly frame the space which
exists in the body of the journal for
whatever is on our readers’ minds,
which is plenty—a multitude of movement
practices, performance forms,
techniques and experiences with bodywork,
movement training, reeducation,
and dancemaking in the Americas, Europe,
and finally beginning to extend
beyond, as we reach for the like-minded
in other cultures.
Throughout the summer, determined
to have a new name by this issue, we
engaged all willing subjects in the
search. Though we played with a range
of ideas, we continued to feel it might
be important to keep Contact in the
name—not only to connect our future
with our past, and to indicate our ongoing
commitment to the Contact work,
but to reinforce the currency of the
word itself: contact, touch, the meeting
of minds, people, bodies of work. We
are always aiming for this.
We like the “Q” too. Some names
considered: Contact, Contact Q, The Q,
Contact Journal, Contact Papers, Contact
Biannual, Contact 2, CQ, C2, C?.
But maybe it all has to go, a snake
shedding its skin. “Second Skin,” not a
bad name.
Could the name be something that
identifies but does not define? Something
that lets the thing speak for itself,
like you and I do? What, after all, is a
“Fred” or a “Sally”? Only what they put
into it, I suppose. A rose is a rose, etc.
I remember not long ago Deborah
Hay was looking for a name for a new
dance and didn’t want it to be a word.
She finally arrived at a little drawing, a
logo, a symbol that could represent the
piece in the place of a word on the
page. I still wonder how she refers to
the piece in conversation.
For that matter, the name could be a
movement itself. We could call it
[wave] or [twist] or [squat] and do the
movement whenever mentioning the
mag. A kind of permanent charade.
“Charade,” that’s a nice name.
It was a relief not to force a choice
when the right option hadn’t yet been
found. I look forward to that special
body hum that signals the right choice—
the organism primitively indicating
‘yes’, opening, going toward. Not “yes,
because...,” with a list of good reasons
to support it. Just yes.
Indeed, the search for a new name
has all the fun of a crossword puzzle
and the angst of a midlife crisis, the
excitement of making a piece of art and
the responsibility of getting the grant in
the mail before the post office closes.
Our timing seems to be somewhere
between body time and the clock,
between geological time and the fax,
between now and the speed of a good
idea. Please don’t hesitate to send in
yours.

by Nancy Stark Smith

----------------

SHELF LIFE—publications
by Steve Paxton

Only the years separate me, a participant in the events of these two
books, and me, the ‘objective’ reviewer. I read them, then, with double vision.
At first glance they were histories of two strands of improvisational thought:
one strand was formal (Novack’s); the other anarchic (Ramsay’s).
Second glances reveal they are academic theses dressed up for publication.
Artifacts of the times (interviews, reviews) were sifted to create the authors’
themes; very like retro-entrail. The findings were then sorted to create patterns
and cemented into place. This cementing creates mosaics from what was once
influx. Both Novack and Ramsay have made excellent patterns appear in their
books, and they gave me much to think about—the translation of one medium
into another, and life into print. Life was more complete and fluid than history
is. But the historians have the responsibility for the last cementing of the
artifacts.
THE GRAND UNION (1970-1976): An Improvisational Performance
Group. Margaret Hupp Ramsay. Peter Lang Publishing Inc.: NY, 1991,
195pp., illustrated.
Grand Union was an improvisational dance/theatre group which evolved out
of a work called Continuous Project Altered Daily, by Yvonne Rainer, the
American choreographer turned film director.
Originally nine choreographers and performers, it was an attempt at a
leaderless, democratic, spontaneously creative ensemble. As such it succeeded
and then failed. The initially stimulating freedoms became ambiguities after a
few years, and by the end in 1976 had fallen to suspicion, doubt, innuendos.
Freedom attended by hope was a creative stimulus. Conversely, lack of
guidance attended by doubt was remarkably inhibiting.
Dr. Margaret Hupp Ramsay’s book consists of scholarly, detailed, well-
documented oral history. Every quoted remark is noted at the chapter end.
Photographs of Grand Union appear at the end, and are disappointing.
But the text is not Ramsay’s weaving of the diverse strands into a smoothly
readable, cohesive story of five tumultuous years is very tight. She begins with
the necessary explanations and then the reader is, seamlessly, in the thick of it
Ramsay recounts the internal descent of Grand Union into neurotic
existential turmoil. The evidence is in the rich layers of material, especially one
remark by dance historian Sally Banes who describes a dizzying “reality warp”:
“The roles, characters and persona transformed easily to accommodate
the changing flow of situations... For instance, a ‘real’ Dilley interacting
with a fabricated’ Gordon, or a Lewis who has been instructed by
Brown to imitate Paxton... [They were] people who seemed to operate
outside any established rules for reality—ordinary, dramatic, or
fictional.”
Unfortunately Ramsay does not extend her scope to compare such problems to
those encountered by performers of set material. This would have been
instructive. On evidence presented we may assume the problem arose from
improvisational freedom. Performing itself is an altered state, continued daily;
Ramsay comes very close to a central issue, but her distant, academic tone
prevents analysis. She cannot speculate in this setting.
She concludes: “[It is up to the] next generation to make sense out of one
of the richest, most courageous and least self-conscious creative periods in
dance history, a period that profoundly changed the direction of dance
performance.”
Shorn of hyperbole, she has shifted responsibility to the next generation but
the next generation has already gone by, making their own unexplained
choreographic works. Have we the luxury of time? Ramsay is a dance
improvisor, so we may assume she has experienced the personal differences
between choreography and improvisation. I feel that the allusions come across
in her text as personal squabbles. They are in fact issues which bear upon the
everyday and political realities, especially recent changes: what problems arise
when social forms and norms are absent? What difficulties does freedom bring?
Freedom is not always possible and when it occurs we must seize the moment.
Grand Union had five years: the freedom was not always easy, and Ramsay was
the next generation. She has left the difficulties where she found them. I fear
that generations succeeding hers will trip upon them.
Ramsay here nicely establishes her academic credentials. We still require
answers: is improvisation a retrograde or higher evolution in dance? Is it a
mental aspect of flying beyond technical security which is posed as a final goal
of technical study? Is it a place where Dionysius reigns? Or do Apollo and
Dionysius meet? Or does Dionysius wear Apollo’s mask?

In the early 1960s, I was a student. Modern dance was dropping its antiballet
chauvinism, and in the process began to dilute some of the more
distinctive styles which had developed. Dance in general strove for ever higher
technical levels, achieved them and moved on up. With lip service to the
founding principles of modern dance still available, and against the ascending
aridity of technical amalgamation, I spent about ten years exploring the
possibilities of the ordinary movement we all start moving with. Others poked
even deeper into the mysteries, examining infant development, the effect of
images in originating movement; in general, a reevaluation of the mind-body
situation. Improvisation is, of course, the mind-body situation in a nutshell and
was absent, except for Anna Halprin, from the modern dance practices then
popular. Times were ripe for an examination of it.
SHARING THE DANCE: Contact Improvisation and American
Culture. Cynthia J. Novack. New Directions in Anthropological Writing.
Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 1990. xvii + 258 pp.,
photographs, references, index.
Cynthia J. Novack has constructed a prismatic view of the movement form
contact improvisation, which began in 1972 and grew into a loosely structured
network around the world. A dancer working toward her degree in anthropology,
Novack participated in contact improvisation classes and jams, gathered
interviews and viewed the relevant videotapes.
Since the early ’70s, video has evolved into a standard recording device.
This must make anthropologists happy. Novack’s generation has for study a
visual perspective previously unavailable to those who wished to examine the
development of a particular technique or movement aesthetic. She begins her
book with a description of a moment in a duet. I imagine she was writing in
front of a video monitor:
“The supporting figure shifts slightly, and his partner tumbles
smoothly to the floor; the two, enmeshed but not entangled, roll and
slide over each other now, exchanging support like two friendly wrestlers
whose desire is to keep moving rather than to pin the opponent. Now
they are standing, leaning against each other, still not looking into the
other’s face; with a sudden leap, the smaller man launches himself into
the air. His partner steps quickly underneath him to break his fall,
becoming a kind of moving post around which he spirals in his descent."
I imagine she watches it again on the screen, perhaps using slow motion to
examine details...
Novack’s anthropological approach makes this book remarkably unlike dance
histories and personality-driven memoirs to which we are accustomed. There
is an academic and particular, slightly staccato quality to her text. She has
chosen words precisely to reveal the times (1960s and ’70s, in the U.S.A.) from
many perspectives, with special attention to the larger social and political
developments of the ’60s; the upheavals and uproars, and the attitudes behind
them; and then she looks for their imprint in the aesthetics and practice of the
new improvisation form. She also draws parallels and contrasts with social
dancing, the ballet, modern dance, Merce Cunningham, Anna Halprin, Erick
Hawkins, the experimental dance and theater of the 1960s, and more: martial
arts, Zen Buddhism, touch, physical law and nature, and improvisation generally.
The many photographs instruct and amuse equally because with so many
references we never know who is going to appear next, nor even why they have
been invited. The captions reveal that they aren’t there because they look great
or because we love them, but to make another point in the prismatic view. Thus
we can look through Carla Fracci and Erik Bruhn to the tradition of facial
expressions in ballet; or we can see through the physical geometries of Pilobolus
Dance Theatre how their use of shapes of the body elaborate into effects in
space around the body.
We also see a number of performing groups who do not express visual
patterns in this way. We see that these performers are not necessarily on their
feet, and that people are touching each other for personal or physical reasons
rather than stylistic ones, and the performers seem not to care so much how they
look but are focused upon what they are doing.
At any rate, this is the nature of Novack’s prism. Each facet is drawn
clearly enough so we can look through it to the other side, where some other
dance is happening, some influential social development is occurring. However
disparate these facets may be, anthropologically they are married in time.
Novack’s viewpoint is so singular that the small cracks which I spy in her
structure are endearing—I accept the cracks in order to enjoy her concept of how
such a structure might work, what it can show us about how culture is
constructed.
Ideally, Novack’s book would be expanded to really dig into the century of
modem dance, which has achieved remarkable formal diversity. The anthropological
distance and the wealth of information she can concentrate for the reader
makes her approach an interesting candidate to explore how a notion like
modem dance could come into being. The variety of influences mentioned in
her text precludes tracing each genealogy, but suggests that each could be traced
using this first study as an opening to understand how many levels of culture
from high, to vernacular, to foreign, may operate within a ‘single’ current
movement construct.
However, Novack’s deliberate discipline is to limit the time scan and then
connect what she finds growing within it. She finds a form of improvisation
which many people felt “literally embodied the social ideologies of the early
’70s which rejected traditional gender roles and social hierarchies.”
For me, the emphasis of the book relies on the point of view in this
statement. Contact improvisaiton is seen not so much in terms of its place in
a dance lineage, but primarily through the eyes of a counter-culture which
existed to protest a peculiar unjust war in Vietnam, and to promote racial
equality.
The emphasis of Sharing the Dance might have been how artistic subcultures
influenced the counter-culture of the ’60s (witness the extraordinary
infiltration of the idea of ‘Pop Art’.) Or perhaps we must admit that it is a two-
way street, to come back to Novack’s thesis with an understanding that we are
dealing with matters of echo and resonances between groups of us which
reinforce a focus into a ‘topic’. On this topic, though my ‘reality’ and Novack’s
construct don’t jibe precisely, I completely enjoyed pondering whether the times
produce the events or the events define the times. Or...
Novack’s valuable reference index runs to eleven pages of books, articles,
films and videotapes.

----------------

THOUGHTS ON TO BE CONTINUED a sketch of a dance/narrative process
by Simone Forti

To Be Continued was performed at Danspace, St. Mark’s Church in New York City in
April 1991, by Simone Forti & Troupe which then included KJ. Holmes, Lauri Nagel,
Eric Schoefer, and David Zambrano. We had been working together for five years,
though Eric had joined the group in 1989 after David Rosenmiller left. Jon Gibson
created the music for this piece on a series of tapes to be played and overlapped over
various loudspeakers as we saw fit. Andrew Gaines played the tapes for the
performance. We worked on the piece for a month.
We had been using a dance/narrative form I’ve been developing that I call “moving
the telling.” In this process we focus on chosen subject matter—a person, a memory,
a landscape, a news story, the wrinkles on a shirt, etc.—as our point of reference and
allow the spontaneous impulses for movement and for speaking to manifest so that
they supplement each other intuitively and naturally. This has its roots in how we
communicate all the time.
Let me give an example. I once watched a video program in which Joseph
Campbell (in the context of a discussion about consciousness) described the
movements of a climbing vine in his garden in Hawaii. As he spoke, he started out
with a simple gesture describing his terrace. By the end of his story he had shifted
forward on his chair, extended himself to full sitting height and, spiraling slightly to
the left, uncurled his held-together fingers, his face in an upward and diagonal
presentation to the sun. To tell us what he meant, he had embodied the climbing vine.
The following are notes about the process of creating the piece.

Working from objects, making drawings as a bridge to embodying. The eye moves,
the hand moves. The body embodies, the hand moves and the body’s embodiment
shows in the drawn line. And then the body can continue on its own, embodying a
detail while the speaking gives the large shape or the context, or the other way around.

It’s representational. It represents an awareness of an object, through how that
awareness moves the body, how the body speaks of knowing the object, of the object
Of impressions. It’s impressionistic.

I once ate some bad shellfish and landed in a hospital. One day I stood at the window
daydreaming. A small scene that happened in the grounds below made an impression.
On a path, a convalescent in pajamas looked at a tree. And as he looked he shifted his
weight and twisted and stretched just a little. He embodied the tree, for a moment,
and shuffled on.

I went to see the Fauve* show at the Met. Then I brought the Troupe. Then Jon. I
liked the freedom of the paint, how what its colors were and how its material was set
down on canvas was in response to something outside the one who was putting on the
paint, giving the impression of that thing, in a way that harked deeply of that aspect of
that thing that was being experienced.
*Fauve was an outgrowth of impressionism, but wilder. Andrd Derain and Henri
Matisse were part of this group.

For us, the drawing of the objects was a bridge, and as we came to be intimate with
the drawing, it worked as an analogy. If we could draw what we saw, we could “body
move” what we saw, with all the kinetic stimulation that can come from the
developing page now coming from our movement in itself and in its relationship to its
source: a tom box, a balcony of repeating arches, a comer where steam pipes
disappear into the wall.

The speaking is more like the line. It’s black and white. Whereas the movement is
the paint. Roughly. We spoke of the music as the frame. Jon liked the idea. And
made the music to be the frame. It consisted of his saxophone playing recorded
during our rehearsals together, and some nature sounds.

I went to see Robert Rauschenberg’s big lithographs from the ’60s at the Whitney
Museum. Photographic images floated in space in different orientations. A propeller
plane in the upper left, a tilted Rubens nude towards center, an upside down image of
workers in a foundry, and throughout, kinetic laying on of line and paint. I had been
looking for ways to include plenty of “free” dancing in our piece. And it occurred to
me to include the possibility that anyone could go “dancing-through” anybody’s
portraits or still lifes, anytime they wanted.

The process of making the piece was very close to workshop. Maybe because the
technique is elusive. One day you can do it, it’s rolling out naturally. Next time you
can’t get the hang of it. It’s the technique of tapping into a certain kind of awareness,
and a certain kind of behavior which does have natural roots, like Joseph Campbell
weaving his body language into his speaking, but which we’re not used to being
conscious of, or developing. Certain exercises can tap it. And different ones of us
responded more to one exercise or another.

Contact Improvisation is very important to Eric and to KJ. and one day I suggested
they try a duet with story telling. Actually, with a conversational mode. They chose
the subject of relationships. Their conversation was pretty banal (which brings up an
interesting question of how to stay poetically vital) but something very interesting
happened with their movement They started their duet and just focused on the
movement til they were well into it before beginning to speak. They weren’t going to
try to have their conversation effect their movement. It did, but in subtle ways: the
gestures that can’t be helped, the spurt of energy on being reminded of something you
want to tell about, the story’s bravado that catches the movement on fire.

There was an exercise which was important to us as an ice breaker: words on the
diagonal. It’s a short solo form, a kind of game. Someone calls a word out and
whoever’s turn it is starts out on a pathway across the space, moving and talking,
using the word as an impetus. Somehow the pressure is minimal. There’s no decision
about going; it’s your turn so you go. The sudden word calls up images, you can
almost see the player bounce the word around in his or her body, getting a feel of the
ideas that rush in, and getting started on one of those ideas. We kept words on the
diagonal as an exercise but dropped it from the piece.

At a certain point I started wondering how we were going to get from the exercises to
the piece. And then the piece started to emerge as an orchestration of our two basic
exercises: still lifes, which also involved drawings, and portraits. And dancing-through
became the counterpoint which wove it all together. The structure became set. We
knew who would start, at what point objects to draw would be brought in or removed,
in what order the portraits would come.
There were some other elements: a contact improvisation duet for K.J. and Eric
while they talked about their families, K.J. singing with one of the saxophone
recordings, and Simone and Lauri echoing environmental sounds. And slides of our
drawings. But the sections were always a new rendering of our materials. We were
improvising.

The still lifes render the present. The portraits depend on memories, and render the
past. But the memories have to come by surprise. The portrait process is more
complex, more mysterious. Memories come that are of events, stories, details of the
subject’s environment, their way of moving or thinking. What is embodied? Where
does the movement come from? Mostly it’s specific memories, like a prevailing mood
or a patch of light on the wall, that get animated. At moments, the subject of the
portrait is embodied directly.

Transcript of Lauri’s “move-tell” portrait:
“He doesn’t stop moving. He moves like there’s something inside him moving.
And he says, 7 have to tell you something’. And then when there’s no place left to go
he still has to keep moving so he starts to put things in places, his shoe where the
cereal goes, a piece of candy in his slipper, pencil in the garbage can. He really
wants to stop. He takes off his clothes then he puts them back on, four shirts, then he
takes them off and he puts on two belts. 7 have to tell you something’. They always
seem to have bingo in the hospitals and in this hospital there was the kind with the
round wooden balls instead of the chips. And the balls are all in a cage and they all
say different numbers on them. And he likes to crank the wheel on the cage and they
make a loud noise and all the balls rattle around inside and then one ball falls out and
he reads cause he can still read and he says, ‘M 29’. Yesterday when I was at the
hospital I saw this thing on the chair. It was a jacket and it had a zipper, it had these
long straps. He said, 7 have to tell you something’. He said it wasn’t chains. It
wasn’t trains or planes or chains. I said, ‘Was it straps?’ It was straps.’’

Often a still life and a portrait or, say, two still lifes might happen simultaneously,
placed in different parts of the performance space. This practice came out of an
exercise called simultaneous stories, which develops the skill of staying in focus while
not obliterating the other nearby story. It takes listening to the general sound of the
other, and sensitively building a rhythm with silences and room for separating and
blending the stories. Amazing coincidences emerge, no doubt helped by the peripheral
hearing of a word from the other story which makes yours take an unexpected jump of
focus.
Often we worked together with one performer initiating, say, a portrait, and one or
more others in a supportive role, in a mode we developed through an exercise we
called taking the “uh huh” position. It’s an exercise in listening, nodding as comes
naturally in conversation, maybe asking for more information or clarification, and also
taking action to embody aspects of the emerging story, diving in on an impulse to
become the easy chair the story teller can sink into while remembering an uncle.

Our warmups were an important part of our rehearsals so that when we would start to
speak we would be well into a movement mode in our blood and in our mind. It
became clear that I should lead the warmups so that we would come to the speaking
out of a shared physical experience. 

----------------


STALK an improvisation practice
by Ruth Zaporah

A friend and I were travelling around the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. One
day, we met a man who described a grotto, a cave that held within it several pools of
water. The grotto was deep in the jungle about fifty km. south of where we were
staying. He told us of a local farmer who guides visitors into the cave. All of the
information was very vague but, early one morning, we prepared for the adventure.
First we covered ourselves up from head to toe with long pants, long-sleeved shirts,
hiking boots, neck scan/es, rain wear, hats, cotton gloves and sun screen. We
brought along a compass, a flashlight, extra water, a snakebite kit, antihistamines, and
lip balm. This was the tropics and we were going into the jungle; a team of explorers,
protected from bites, scratches, poisons, too much heat, too much sun, getting lost or
thirsty. Intent on beating the heat of the day, we bundled into the car early in the
morning and took off.
Fortunately, there aren’t a whole lot of roads in the Yucatan so we didn't have too
many choices. Eventually, after frequent stops for advice, we came to what we
thought was the likely area. There were two title children playing in a field. We asked
them where we might find a guide to lead us to the caves. They went for their father
who was working in a nearby field and brought him back to us. He told us he was too
busy preparing for planting, but that the children could take us. We must have looked
dismayed because before he turned and went back to work he assured us that they
were quite capable. The girl was six and her little brother, four. They were barefoot,
she wearing a little cotton dress and he, shorts. She always had his little hand in
hers. Feeling uneasy, but not wanting to be insulting, we followed the children across
a yard littered with tires, cars and other msted debris and then into the dense foliage
that circled their small household. We followed an overgrown, narrow path, the
children skipping along ahead of us, talking, singing, laughing.
After awhile, we descended a steep hill that dropped us right to the portal of the
cave. It was a small opening amidst thickly growing vines. Without the children, we
never would have noticed it. They led us through the passageway into a dark, dank,
winding tunnel that descended deeper and deeper into the earth. Occasionally, the
children instructed us to crawl on our bellies to avoid the bats hanging overhead, and,
even then, we sometimes felt them brushing along our backs. A bit further on,
following some casual hand signals of the little girl, we skirted around Pipo, an
enormous tarantula, guarding his little comer of darkness. The children were quite
familiar with his idiosyncracies and even seemed happy to see him. Eventually we
came to the black pools we’d been searching for. Two silent pools rested, bottomless,
clear, side by side in a large and dimly lit chamber.
Our guides, the little girl and boy, felt as comfortable there as we would feel in our
living rooms. They were stalkers, their eyes and ears alerted to any signs of danger,
of newness, change. Their awareness protected them. The jungle, which was so
ominous to us, seemed to extend, harmoniously, from their very beings.
To improvise is to stalk. We stalk the objects of awareness, the phenomenon of the
limitlessness of sensation, memory and imagination. We deconstruct this phenomenon into
details and, through them, witness our continual experience. These experiences are, at times,
perilous, and at other times enlightening. Whatever they are, we meet them openhandedly.
Sometimes, this means we crawl on our bellies, slide pressed along a wall, even momentarily
disappear. We walk softly, crash into, or fly, whatever works, whatever helps us greet ourselves.
For now, from the limitlessness of possibilities, we’ll extract and explore only four.

FOUR STATES: an exercise
Everyone, distance yourself from one another and stand with your arms relaxed by
your sides. I'll describe four forms or activities to you. For the next ten minutes or so
improvise by switching back and forth between them. Spend as long as you like in
each one. Don't msh through. Be sure to keep the forms distinct from one another.
In other words, don't blend or merge their aspects. Shift clearly from one to another.
In the first form involve yourself only with breath. No movement. Remain still in
whatever posture you're in. Play with your breath, the ordering, rhythm, depth, and
force. No voice, just breath.
The second form is very slow and continuous movement in silence. No sounds,
stops, starts or pauses. Ever moving slow motion.
The third is large, loud and travelling sound and movement. Keep the sound and
movement linked and always travel through the room with it
The final form is non-stop talking. Stop moving for this one, be completely still and
put all your attention into your talking. Let one idea lead you to the next, free associate,
lose control.
Sometime in the next few minutes associate with someone near you. Form a
partnership and continue improvising within these four forms. Now you’re in direct
relation to one another; you’re in the same world. Every move, every shift is a
response to your partner and is either in the same form or one that’s different.
These four forms were chosen for their contrasting qualities. Others could also work too,
since it’s contrasting quality that’s pertinent to the exercise. Why would one want to shift from
very slow movement to loud, boisterous sound and movement? What inspires someone to shift
from a non-verbal orientation to language?
The mind is a limb of the body. Like an arm, for instance. If the arm doesn’t move for an
extended period of time, it atrophies, withers, loses its ability to move, forgets. Then it has to be
coaxed back, reminded, exercised, and encouraged to recover.
We're forcing an issue here. A student is asked to shift from one arbitrarily chosen condition
(slow motion) to another (loud, traveling, sound and movement). The shift reflects an internal
logic. In other words, it must make sense to them. The process must be a living experience.
Once the intention to shift is there, the mind can expand to accommodate and rationalize any
contrasting realities, no matter how quickly they arise and how unreasonable they appear. The
imagination doesn’t attach itself to anything. It doesn’t want to stay put or not stay put.
Now we crawl on our bellies, avoiding the bats. Now pay homage to the tarantula. Now we
dive into the luxury of the pool. If we can adapt to external changes, we can adapt to internal
ones. Stalking change, adapting adapting itself.
All of this inner stalking, tripping off into the imagination, can distract us from the world around
us. The latter part of the exercise takes the student into a partnering relationship, and insists that
they come out of themselves enough to notice the other, empathize with the other and share
reality-making.
The partners communicate using these four forms. Contrast brings liveliness and breadth to
their communication. Limited to four choices, participants engage with the forms differently each
time they return to them. Slow movement might mean something different the second time
around, or the fourth, or fifth. The possibilities for any given form range. Slow movement, or any
form, can be the voice of just about anything.


----------------
A PRACTICE CALLED "ROAD" studying "movement in meditation" 
by Andrea Morein

Central Java, Indonesia

SUPRAPTO SURYODARMO (Prapto)
is a Javanese performer and movement
master who lives and teaches mostly in his
hometown of Solo in Central Java, Indonesia.
He has a special way of teaching how
to unify body energies with mental awareness
through the medium of movement and
meditation. Prapto has developed his
teaching program over the last ten years
particularly for Western artists, movement
teachers and performers. He holds a regular
course program on a specially designed
piece pf land which he created as a kind of
nature temple in order to support the student's
exploration of his/her individual
source for genuine expression. This program
is called: Padepokan Lemah Putih,
Mojosongo Seminar.
Prapto's approach shows parallels to
the ancient teachings from his Hindu-Bud-
dhist Javanese background, yet he has freed
himself from the traditional forms and
thereby has become more accessible to the
needs of the Western student.
After working for several years with
some of Prapto's authorized instructors in
Europe, I spent some months in Java
studying with him. To go to work directly
with Prapto becomes truly necessary at a
certain point. It comes from the need to
develop greater depth in the ability to synchronize
intention, action, and awareness—of
one's expression and of the environment.
For me the quality which Prapto
helps to develop could be called "authenticity,"
which I have found to be lacking in
the contemporary cultural climate in Europe.


It All Started with a Question
Back in 1985, 1 met Min Tanaka, the
Japanese dancer/farmer, at the Butoh
Festival in Berlin. After taking a workshop
with him there, I became involved
in a network of training and performance
groups that functioned along the
principles of Min's work, which he had
initiated and named Body Weather
Laboratories. Min used to say that his
dance was about asking questions. It
was through his approach that I became
aware of how relaxing the mind
can affect movement patterns and vice
versa, and I started asking myself:
"What is meditation?
An old friend of mine, Jose Mulder
van de Graf, had been studying with
another movement master, in Indonesia,
whom he affectionately called
"Prapto." He seemed to be involved in
some kind of "movement in meditation"
and so I asked him how to meditate.
I don't actually remember his answer,
but I remember how busy we
were at the time comparing notes about
the methods and styles of our respective
masters. They did have a lot in
common: Both Min and Prapto have
experience working with the minds
and emotions of Western students.
Both take the whole environment and
state of being of the performer or practitioner
into consideration and they
both work with the idea of including
everything, e.g., disturbing noises, all
conditions of the weather, and all
thoughts and emotions arising and
changing all the time. They both emphasize
that one needs to practice this
also in one's daily life and both offer
two- to three-month study programs in
their respective countries where the
student has the opportunity to explore
his/her states of mind under varying

conditions—in the mountains, by the
sea, moving in a temple or in the midst
of a busy Tokyo street. Dance and
movement seem more like something
that simply occurs in relating with oneself,
with others, and with the surroundings,
rather than something that
you do.
It took some more years before I
was sufficiently "cooked" in my own
juice to want to see what my friend's
practice looked like. He invited me to
a video showing of Prapto's work in
Java and a kind of work-demonstration.
The video showed Westerners on
an Indonesian temple site doing flowing
tai chi-like movements. I wondered,
"Why do these movements seem
so intent on beauty and balance?" This
seemed a bit too tame for me. Especially
in comparison with what I was
used to from Min's work, in which the
human body was allowed to shed its
civilized control and show itself in a
disintegrated reduction to sheer existence
beyond any familiar aesthetic
ideal.
Nevertheless, I was impressed with
some of the students of Prapto. They
seemed to be gentle and genuine and
had a non-dramatic way of going about
their lives and in the way they made
contact with others. And above all, I
was intrigued by the variety of their
professional backgrounds—there were
tai chi teachers, healers, musicians,
architects, ethnologists, dancers, etc
among them.
Joining one of the regular Saturday
practice sessions in Berlin made me
understand in my body and especially
with my awareness what this practice
might be good for my own sanity and
a sense of stillness and dignity.
The question "what is meditation?"
came up again in 1988 while I was in
the U.S. While there, I took instruction
in Shamatha-Vipassana meditation and
began reading the books of Tibetan
Buddhist teacher Chogyam Trungpa. I
was finding out about meditation at
last.
It took until October 1991, two and
a half years later, before I was sitting
on a plane to Java to study with Prapto.
I went for a three-month course
which he calls "Vocabulary—Nature
and Life."

Mojosongo—Nine Fruits
Prapto's Land
A small Combi bus would collect
our group of eight students every
morning to drive from the city of Solo,
where we were all living, to Mojosongo,
a village outside of town where
Prapto had designed a piece of land as
a practice ground. This land had been
shaped and cultivated by Prapto with
his knowledge of and attitude towards
nature—"for goodness." A sense of
devotion, of relaxation, of beauty and
of humor marked our first meeting
with him there. We saw him arrive
with a stick of incense and a blossom
which he offered to a nature shrine before
welcoming us.
There are four principle areas on
his land which were named and
shaped according to a specific theme.
In the first week of our stay, Prapto
began to introduce us to these themes
and practices and suggested that we
find out for ourselves which of the four
we would choose for the rest of our
course. This created an intense investigation
for each of us into the nature of
our mind, our patterns and our inner
intentions. How and what to choose
became a vast mirror of what the work
at hand was for each one of us in the
larger framework of our lives.
Here are short descriptions of the
four areas:
PENDOPO: This was a rectangular
cement floor with pillars holding up a
bamboo roof (and actually the only
place with some shade). It was also to
be our group practice meeting place.
Prapto explained that Pendopo represented
the sense of "house," of "staying,"
of "sense of family." How to
discover in movement the sense of a
place, an anchor, and a place from
which to look out into the world.
These were the themes and practices in
Pendopo.
The next area was called ROAD. It
looked more like a mini-orchard arranged
a bit like a maze, with pathways,
earth mounds and ditches between
lines of small mango trees and
higher trees (which had lost most of
their leaves overnight, devoured by a
swarm of caterpillars). "Road.. .still
very difficult for me," explained Prapto.
"In the sense of being transient, on
the move, no reference point to a fixed
place." It had to do with "stepping
out" beyond one's territory. My first
thought was: Road as in path. Holy
Shit! I panicked. Not this one, too
difficult. Me. Who is always looking
for a place to stay...
MANDALA represents "the sense
of circulation, of receptive energy, of
nature cycles, of feminine principle."
This area was a Sacred architecture: an
octagon-shaped cement "stage" surrounded
by beautiful trees; a kind of
offering tower with a stone field
around it; and a big earth mound
which Prapto often called "Woman
Stupa Hill." This was a rather varied
landscape, situated somewhat in the
centre of the whole land overlooked by
an even higher hill where a huge Buddha
statue sat on his Lotus throne
shaded by bamboo trees.
SQUARE: This was a very large
earth field at the upper end of the land.
It seemed lowered into the ground, like
a swimming pool, some steps of earth
led you onto it. Square represents "the
sense of being seen, of a public place,
in society, being on the stage, interacting
with the world. "You need to find
a door," Prapto said when we first
practiced there. How to relate with
open space...?
We were given two weeks to explore
these four practice areas with
Prapto in various ways, and then we
went on to Borobudur.

Movement Practice on
Borobudur
Borobudur is located some 60 kilometers
away from Solo, and is one of
the biggest Buddhist stupas in the
world. This ancient monument with
thousands of Buddha figures has reliefs
running along the many terraces and
levels which tell the stories of the Buddha
and of the Bodhisattvas and depict
all levels of realization. Prapto himself
is a Buddhist and before going he
asked us to bring an offering for the
monks of the Mendut monastery nearby,
without giving us the impression
that we needed to be Buddhists as
well.
At Borobudur, Prapto introduced us
to a meditation in movement practice
he calls Reading, which he wanted us to
explore on the four sides of the stupa.
Each of the four sides has a particular
meaning which is shown by the mudras
(hand positions) of the Buddhas on the
lower terraces.
Prapto introduced the themes of the
mudras to us. On the East side, the
name of the mudra was Calling the
Earth as Witness to my Enlightenment.
Here Prapto's suggestion was to work
from the ground, sensing the contact
with the earth as a basic way of moving/
a practice in grounding and in
clearing one's awareness. This related
to the pacifying aspect of the Buddha
family of Vajra as I found out later
when I studied the "five Buddha families"
in greater depth as they are taught
by Chogyam Trungpa.1
The South side was the mudra of
Generosity, which Prapto called "Offering."
This relates to the enriching
aspect of the Buddha family of Ratna.

Prapto's suggestion was to practice
moving and giving, and being aware of
looking out into space.
On the West side the mudra is
traditionally called Absorption and we
practiced with the theme of "Receiving."
This relates to the magnetizing
aspect of the Buddha family of Padma.
Prapto described this as a very introverted
movement practice.
The North side is traditionally the
mudra of Fearlessness, which Prapto
called "Go on your way, don't be
afraid." This relates to the Buddha
family of Karma.
Having introduced these themes to
us, Prapto suggested we move freely
according to the themes, while trying
to Read. At that point we all felt a bit
overwhelmed. The work was a tremendous
challenge. This was Prapto's
development of a movement practice
according to Buddhist principles and
was not very easy for us to follow at
that point
Slowly it dawned on us that Reading
for Prapto was the actual awareness
of one's own state of mind in
movement, of physical and emotional
experiences included in simply being
present. Being in a particular place,
sensing how that place is affecting one
and how in fact there is less and less
the notion of one, in the sense of me.
It's more about following the line of the
movement and realizing how movement
is a forever changing experience
of travelling through space and of
relating with whatever comes up—in
this sense the masses of tourists or the
scorching sun on Borobudur were simply
ways to practice "including" and
"long endurance," and practice "for
goodness" rather than "doing good."
And we began to Read what caught
our eyes in passing the reliefs, the
niches, the trees, the rain, the sensation
of turning a comer from one wall to
the next, or of meeting each other from
afar. A taste of panoramic awareness.
Our task was enormous and Prapto
suggested we find our own way to
explore either on only one side, or
going from one side to the next, bringing
the previous attitude with us, so
that an accumulative effect would begin
to build.
In a clockwise direction, we began
to explore Reading. What I encountered
was a vast sense of space, a sense
of deep devotion at being on the mountain
of endless Buddhas looking out
into the tropical landscape of mountains
and high palm trees—a sense of
timelessness and a sense of being able
for short moments to give up all conscious
effort to do it right—simply to
feel the effect of the place and the
hugeness of it.
This was by no means some "enlightened"
state of mind; it had more to
do with the fact that I was very weakened
by a fever, and could hardly keep
up my usual control, or for that matter
hold my body in certain ways. One of
my fellow students suggested that all I
could do was to offer my weakness to
the Buddhas and actually it was during
that week that Prapto said to me, "You
are beginning to be without mirror.
More seeing yourself in actual situation.
On the table." In fact, I was
experiencing alone-ness intensely. It
was in that moment that I gave in to
my "first thought, best thought" in
choosing a practice, which was Road
(as in path). I would follow on this
path for the rest of the course. I just
simply gave in.
During the three months, we also
practiced on the hill, by the ocean and
at Candi Sukkoh, an ancient fertility
temple from the Hindu-Buddhist period
in ancient Java. To describe each
place would exceed the limits of this
account.

"For Human Growing"
Prapto's Background
Padepokan Lemah Putih is the official
name for Prapto's teaching program.
Padepokan is the Javanese word for the
place in the traditional Javanese aristocratic
court buildings where a state of
clarity can be reached through meditation.
Lema Putih means white and
gentle. Padepokan Lemah Putih Mojosongo
Seminars is the place where
artists from Indonesia, Europe, and
U.S.A. come in order to study self-
healing by movement in meditation
and to explore creative activities in all
areas of the arts.
During my stay in Java, a phrase
from my Buddhist teacher, Chogyam
Trungpa Rinpoche, kept coming back
to me more and more when I was
moving; "We are learning how to become
gentle and genuine people." In
fact, the longer I stayed, the more I felt
that the study and practice with Prapto
and my Shamatha Vipassana meditation
practice and Buddhist study were
less and less different from each other.

Actually, when I was doing my formal
sitting practice, things Prapto had said
to me came back as meditation instruction
and vice versa— when I was practicing
movement with Prapto, many
experiences and principles I had encountered
on the Buddhist path came
to life for me in an embodied sense.
There is a total absence of spiritual
dogmatism in Prapto's way of working
with others. It makes no difference to
him whether people are Christian,
Hindu, Muslim or atheists. He has
deep respect for people's beliefs and
has inspired many of his students to
search for "their" spiritual connection
simply by how he embodies that dimension
in his way of life and in his
way of relating with others. Prapto
himself shuns the traditionalist "monkway"
in Buddhism and encourages
people to find out, on their own terms,
what Buddhist teachings might mean
to them from an experiential point of
view.
Prapto's first encounter with like-
minded European movers and performers
was about ten years ago while he
was performing in Koln, Germany.
After that meeting, the first group of
approximately five people went to
study with Prapto in Solo for a year or
longer. They researched, practiced,
exchanged and learned from each
other's cultures and developed this
practice together. Later they became
the first authorized teachers. In a
sense, Prapto knew veiy little about
Western bodies and minds and he had
to study how to teach them what he
knew, to acquire tools of conceptual
and pedagogic communication. On the
other hand the Europeans, by staying
in Java, gradually familiarized themselves
with a more Javanese way of
being and the way of behavior and
communication which had marked
Prapto. I have included some excerpts
from an interview by two of his early
students in which Prapto talks about
his own background and the purpose
of his work. This interview, 'Talking
about Walking," took place in 1985 at
Aryatara Buddhist Institute in Germany
with Christina Stelzer and Jose
Mulder van de Graf.
Question: I would, like to know something
about your background, about your life.
Prapto: Since I was a child I always
followed my father. We went to nature,
we prayed in mysticism, we went
to the mountain, to the burials, to the
shamans. I was very young; I started
at the age of 6 or 7. We usually were
in nature, at least once a week. Later I
studied movement, Javanese self-defense.
I studied Kung Fu with Pak
Sutanto and he also did acupuncture.
This is a Javanese teacher?
Chinese. I studied Karate, not long,
and then I studied free movement.
Who was your teacher for free movement?
Nobody, because at the time I was in a
difficult situation in the city I live in, in
Solo. There is a strong tradition in
dance, which I like very much, but I
could not do it
Why?
It is not my wear [way].
It is not your cloth?
Yes, it is not my cloth. At 25,1 started
free movement. My question was,
"What shall I do?" Then I made a
decision: I like movement but I cannot
go with the traditional line. Then I
started doing it—when the wind blew
through me, I move. When there is
music, I move. I went to the ocean, to
the temple, to the mountain, to the
river, at night or in the morning. I
tried to move in any condition. What
happened made me sometimes "fly,"
without being able to come back for
many days or weeks.
What does it mean "fly"?
Fly means that I cannot relate with
others, because I am confused in my
balance.. That is why it is very important
for someone to do it within a
frame, because if it is always changing,
you need a frame. Because that is
secure. I did this starting in 1970 and I
became very sick in 1974. I went to the
physician as a hyper-nervous.. .[he
laughs].

He said you are crazy?
Yes, a little bit [laughter]. Yes, but I still
could not find a solution for my situation.
Suddenly someone asked me to
go to a "Vipassana" course, a Buddhist
course, and I took a decision, and I left
my work. I decided to go whatever
happens. In the Vipassana course I
saw many people trying to have awareness,
or clear awareness with what they
do, with the simple things, with slow
movement. And then I asked myself;
"Can I make free movement with this
method?" And then I did. Everybody
was only sitting, but I made movement.
At the end of the Vipassana course, I
prayed with the monk, I was crying.
. .and then I became very little and
said, "Please give me a name"; I became
a follower in Buddha's religion.
Before this experience, I did little
performances with free movement.
After the Vipassana practice, I did
performances with a monk, a real
monk. My purpose was, "OK, I want
to become free, but please hold me if I
start flying" [he laughs]. He said, "You
do free movement with music and I do
meditation." This started growing until
I made a choreography in the art center
with the monk, the mantra, with free
movement, with other artists, dancers,
musicians, with shadow puppets.

Traditional ones?
No, from the traditional background,
but developed. The name was "Way-
ang Buddha." We performed it first in
1975 in Mendut and Waysak. This is
one part of the work with art. Practice
and performance to become one.
In my journey in the experience of
studying about movement, after Vipassana,
I could see more...balance. Then
I had the opinion: free free movement!
But also free inside. Free inside also
means: balanced inside. Balance inside
means: no center.

No center? What is this "center"?
Something that blocks inside.
I would like to know what the purpose of
your work is.
Thank you. Our life is always changing.
It is like changing value, changing
movement, changing situation, and so
on, so on. We lose our balance when
we are changing. We are afraid of
changing, and we are not aware when
the changing starts. We don't know
when we begin, when we finish. All
this gave me questions for my life. I
try to find a work or practice through
which I can get to know what changing
is. If I change, the question is, how do
I not lose my balance, how do I not
lose myself. When I stop I am still
open to see what is happening. This
means the need to prepare our body,
our feeling, our mind. That all is preparing.
Preparing to find out what is
my life. And in this process also to
clean the body, the feeling, the mind.
What do you mean by saying "clean"?
Clean is when you are not holding too
much. If we are holding, it means we
have a block. Block means: not alive.
Life energy cannot go through it The
block creates separation between my
life and the energy outside. Yes, that's
why in our practice we start with a
simple frame: sitting, walking, lying,
touching, relation, releasing. That is
daily life. But I know, to see this is
sometimes difficult
Prapto Teaches Me with a
Blossom
During our stay in Borobudur, one
day after lunch we were all sitting
around a big table together with Prapto
having coffee and speaking about eye-
contact and human relations in Javanese
culture, and then about Western
culture and especially about the dualis-
tic struggle within us. I had been feeling
this intensely in my practice so I
asked Prapto about my own struggles
in daily behavior, seeing it so magnified
through the movement practice.
"How can I deal with this? How can I
fully 'enter' a situation?" I asked.
Prapto: "Please put this flower in front
of you on the table." He pointed to
some hibiscus blossoms at the center of
the table around which we were sitting
(a Javanese custom for hospitality). I
picked up a red blossom from there
and put it down right in front of me.
Oh... I realized immediately that I had
not included my seeing, my feeling or
mindfulness in the action. I had simply
operated on automatic.
Prapto: "Yes, you see. Do again,
please."
I tried again. This time I was very
tentative, heavy-handed, about what
might be a good place and position for
the flower.
"Not like this. You have one last
chance," he said jokingly.
This time, my awareness opened
suddenly. I could see the space, the
table, the group, the faces, the general
atmosphere and my hand went to the
blossom and it found the right position
for the flower on the table. It felt more
like offering the blossom to the space
and to all present, more like sharing,
and I felt a tremendous warmth and
aliveness.
P: "Yes. Maybe you can practice
like this?!"
Epilogue: Crystallization
and Consequences
Towards the end of our three-
month course, Prapto asked each of the
groups from the four practice areas to
crystallize their experiences into a final
presentation.
The Road poems I've included here
became part of my project—a dance
performance entitled On the Road. The
poems were "planted" as big calligraphic
signposts on the paths and
ditches of the Road area, in which
Jacqui, an Australian singer, and myself
moved and made sounds. We used
words or sounds from the poems, singing
and walking. Or moving in relation
to the momentary constellation of
bird-sounds and singing and children's
voices heard from afar. The audience
was invited to sit or move in the Road
as well, so the piece communicated the
feeling of being in this landscape (in
this land-art event) together. They
could choose their own point of view,
by changing or shifting places to relate
to the performers' movements or to
find their own preferences for certain
spots. This emphasized the theme of
transcience very directly.
During our public performance,
Jacqui and I found ourselves unexpectedly
joined by Prapto. He seemed to
"hold" the space by moving and singing
Mantras on the top of the Woman
Stupa Hill, overlooking the area of the
Road. I never asked him the exact
reason for his joining us, though later
he said that he always feels "pulled to
go in the Road" and also that he still
feels himself to be "baby in the Road,"
stressing that it takes much courage to
go out on the Road. I agree.

I left Java with a suggestion by
Prapto that I create my own group, to
develop practice and performance
"with a source in Buddhism." I felt
that Prapto had "read" what my deepest
intentions were, and I suddenly
knew the kind of group I wanted to
create.
After my return to Europe, I initiated
this group, which currently has nine
members from four countries and it
was named "Buddha's Cafe." The
name refers to a joke Prapto once
made: he pointed up to the Buddha
statue on the hill on his land and suggested
that we can "go up to Buddha's
Cafe, maybe take along some cookies,"
when we don't know what to do.
"Maybe can help you."
Buddha's Cafe is an interdisciplinary
research and performance group
meeting several times a year in different
cities or places to develop projects
"on site" in nature, for museums, festivals
or for specially chosen locations,
such as the bridges of a medieval town
in Southern Germany or a landscape in
North Holland, where beach, dune,
heath, and forest lie very close together
proposing four different "climate
zones." The project in Holland will be
about passing through the landscape
from four different directions, as a
performance caravan, and transporting
sounds from landscape to landscape.
The group's basic work rests on
sitting and movement meditation practice
and is trying to include the nature
of our difficulties in the process—
namely that all of us live in different
countries and that we struggle always
with the limitations of time and resources
for our practice and project
development meetings. In that sense
Buddha's Cafe is still "on the Road,"
attempting at the moment to create a
more steady and regular base for its
activities in Amsterdam, a city where
questions of Art and Spirituality have
been discussed widely in the early
1990s.

ROAD 4

Looking out
finding my body
turned around
body takes on multiple shapes
stronger tighter
faster lower
wider inner
sharper lonely
sad singing
affecting my perceptions
changing my views

“Can the grass see you?”
Here is a new
point of view
Thank you!

ROAD 1

No battle no project
no task no aim
no giving no getting
no forgetting
not forgetting
no fixed points
to stick to
no back pack load
to carry
empty handed
in the road


ROAD 5

Finding my way
Today
my seeing wanders
in my feet
Not looking for
Not needing to
Not going anywhere
Not walking away
Not searching for
a way to be
not to be in my way
Simple stepping
Foot Foot
Foot Foot
Grass Tree
Grass Mantra Singing
Grass Comer
Path Grass
Step Step
Me Me
See See
Comer Grass Mandala
Walk Fast
Walk Around
Walk Down
Walk Across
Walk Sweat
Walk Butterfly
Walk Mantra Singing
Walk
and bow
Bow
and see
The Heaven The Earth and Me
Terima Kasih.

ROAD 6

for Jacqui
Road alone
Road singing
Share a glass of water
A moment of laughter
Road together
Not for long
Good bye, Jacqui
C’est un plaisir.


ROAD 7
Mas Prapto
Road alone Adieu
Crossing the bamboo Bridge
Oh
Not to disturb the Earth
Hearing the Bird
Stepping
Oh
So gently
The master comes near
Oh
So alone
Butterflies in the Air
Not to disturb
The bridge
Oh
So fresh the Air
Oh
How careful the Feet
In the road
Oh
He goes away
so clear


----------------

TOWARDS A MULTI-DIRECTIONAL
SPIRITUALITY

by Don Hanlon Johnson


Until well into middle-age, I was shaped within
institutions which linked spiritual excellence exclusively
with the cultivation of only one of the many dimensions of
the body, the upper pole of the vertical axis; spiritual
decadence, with the lower pole: first as a Roman Catholic
youth, then as a Jesuit seminarian and priest, and eventually
as a Rolfer. Part and parcel of that teaching was the
assumption that these communities had access to a trans-
cultural grasp of reality, to the nude body of Truth underneath
its colorful ethnic dresses.
Jesus was said to have come down from heaven; dying,
he descended into the realms of purgatory to gather the Old
Testament saints, was raised from the dead and ascended
back up into heaven. In a second great triumph over the
power of death, the body of his mother Mary was taken up
into heaven, the promise of our eventual ascensions.
According to the abstractions of Christian theology,
spiritual evolution begins at inanimate rocks, progresses
upward through plants, fish, birds and mammals until it
reaches an immeasurable gulf bridged by God’s creation of
the soul breathed into mud to make human beings. Then
the upward journey continues in the realm of this new
soul-world, beginning with virtuous humans, continuing up
into the heaven of humans who have died in sanctity, still
higher into the multiple ranks of angels, archangels, thrones
and dominions, seraphim and cherubim, reaching the pinnacle
of spiritual evolution with the Blessed Virgin in front
of the throne of the Holy Trinity. In mirror fashion, spiritual
degradation descends below the middle-realm of soulless
matter through the purgatorial realms of modest human
vices until it reaches the Stygian barrier of no return, where
again it descends through the seven realms of the deadly
sinners into the lowest region of fallen saints and angels, to
the nadir where the highest angel, Lucifer, the light-bearer,
fell in his pride.
The value of a particular class of experiences is measured
according to its location on that vertical axis. The
scale of embodiment reflects that vertical system of values.
The middle realm is that of guts breaking up foods to make
flesh, gas, fat and excrement Vulgar and disgusting, it is
barely human. Both virtue and sin, of course, can occur in
this realm. The good person is hygienic, regulated, has sex
only with wife or husband with genitals in their “natural”
orifices, eats the proper foods and not excrement. Such
virtues are hardly worth speaking of among Christians, a
bare minimum for salvation. And their companion vices
are modest, at their most extreme worthy only of a pass to
the upper balconies of hell, populated by Boschian sodomites
and adulterers. Saintly good and diabolic evil occur
only in the person who stands upright like the old man’s
staff, either in prideful defiance of his Lord God and suppression
of his fellows, or in the saintly offering of his
intricate brain and elegant posture to the authority of Bible
or Pope.
If asked, any theologian would say that “up” was only
metaphorical; heaven and hell were in a different dimension
than ours. But the barrage of Christian art, architecture
and ritual prescriptions taught otherwise, imperceptibly
habituating the believer to stretch up ever higher in his or
her spiritual quest Catholic and High Protestant liturgy are
monodirectional, the priests and ministers entering at
ground level processing upward towards the level of the
church, ideally situated on a prominent rise, and even
further upwards into pulpit and high altar. The movement
patterns in those liturgies are straight-lined, priests, ministers
and acolytes carrying themselves erect. Bows and
prostrations are acknowledgements of “higher-ups.” The
great achievements of sacred architecture, whether Romanesque,
Byzantine or Gothic, coax the eye upward, and
hopefully the soul.
Monastic orders like the Jesuits give more explicit and
refined attention to upward verticality in practices of kneeling,
sitting upright and standing in meditation. Ignatius
Loyola’s “Rules of Modesty” reflected the widely held
assumption that postural verticality served to spiritualize
everyday activities of sitting at one’s desk or walking down
the hallway; in that spirit, the Rules proscribed rotational
sashaying and swaggering, slouchings and leg-crossings.
Ida Rolf was even more explicit about the spiritual
significance of the upward, pinning it down to the proper
cant of the cranium on the neck. As my experience of
learning to run on the soles of my feet bears witness, she
did indeed devote more attention than many students of the
body to downward verticality, having developed an elaborate
set of manipulations for the pelvis, legs, feet and
ankles. Working with her over a decade taught me to
inhabit my previously vacated nether regions. Her manipulations
made me capable of overcoming fears of exploring
the delights of the pelvis by learning how to allow genital
sensations to radiate out through the hips, down the legs,
up into the torso, producing orgasms that were as heavenly
as our high-school catechism promised. But that disciplined
attention to the lower was always in service of
enhancing the upward movement through the top of the
head, where she located spiritual evolution: “This is what
Rolfers are doing: we are lifting a body up. We’re getting
the uppermost pole of the body lifted up... It all sounds so
much alike: I will lift up my head; I am lifting toward the
Lord; I am lifting toward the mountain. All religious
thinking has tended to understand that there was a lifting
up in terms of growth in the spiritual realms.”1
The West’s exaltation of the vertical appears in its most
abstract form in a long and continuous philosophical tradition,
popularly called “the perennial philosophy,” beginning
with Plato and Aristotle, continuing up to the present day
principally among esoteric thinkers, such as Fritjof Schuon,
a member of the Sufi Order in the West:
"...whereas the animal is horizontal and only
advances toward itself-—that is, it is enclosed within
its own form—man, in advancing, transcends himself;
even his forward movement seems vertical, it
denotes a pilgrimage toward his Archetype, towards
the celestial Kingdom, towards God. The beauty of
the anterior side of the human body indicates the
nobleness, on the one hand of man’s vocational
end, and on the other hand of his manner of approaching
it; it indicates that man directs himself
towards God and that he does so in a manner that
is ‘humanly divine’, if one may say so. But the
posterior side of the body also has its meaning: it
indicatesr, on the one hand the noble innocence of
the origin, and on the other hand the noble manner
of leaving behind himself what has been transcended;
it expresses, positively, whence we have come
and, negatively, how we turn our backs to what is
no longer ourselves. Man comes from God and he
goes towards God; but at the same time, he draws
away from an imperfection which is no longer his
own and draws nearer to a perfection which is not
yet his.

I first began to question spiritual verticality when I
moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico in 1971 to set up my
practice as a Rolfer. Living among the remains of the
2000-year old Anasazi culture, and its heirs in the Tewa
Pueblos of the Rio Grande, I was jarred to discover that
this ancient tradition emphasized the spiritual aspects of the
lower pole. Its most obvious manifestation was in sacred
architecture. While Christian churches are ideally placed
on hills, with tall spires, raised altars, and interiors designed
to uplift, here the ceremonial gathering place was
the kiva. Not only was it below ground level, entered by
climbing down a ladder, but the most sacred space within it
was yet a lower and smaller hole, the sipapu, the gateway
to and from the realms of the gods who dwelt not only on
mountain summits, sky and stars, but within the belly of
the earth.
The Pueblo rituals involve a circulation of downward
movement into the kiva, still lower through the sipapu into
the depths of the earth, and upward movements out into the
plazas of the pueblos and further up the holy streams into
the sacred mountains. The specific pattern of body-movement
in these rituals embodies the sacred quality of the
downward. In contrast to the ever upward-striving aesthetic
of Christian-inspired European ballet, the Pueblo dancers
drive their feet heavily downward in response to the sonorous
and repetitive beating of the drums. The ground itself
becomes a resonant drum, throbbing with the percussion of
hundreds of feet. The movement is not exclusively downward;
the torso and head remain erect. Like Chinese t’ai
chi chu'an and qi gong, the movement patterns honor both
poles of the vertical.

But even more challenging to my monotheistic metaphysics
was the realization that up-down vertical was only
one of many directions honored in their theology. Dance,
ritual movements, the design of costumes and the location
of homes and kivas within the pueblos honor a multiplicity
of compass directions, including vectors towards the sacred
mountains, rivers, and the annual course of sun, moon and
stars. A traditional healer from the Vancouver region
writes of his people’s polydirectional choreography:
"Dancing is both a spiritual and a physical
prayer. For instance, our stomp dance helps us get
the life force flowing. When we stomp our feet in
time with the drum, we are connecting our spiritual
roots with Mother Earth’s roots, her veins. At the
same time that we’re stomping our feet, our hands
are dancing. They’re reaching for medicine;
they’re reaching for healing and strength. Another
dance, the spin dance, helps us untie and regenerate
ourselves. We get dizzy from spinning, but
afterwards we see things differently.”3
In addition to sacred architecture, I encountered in the
pueblos another challenge to my heavenward oriented
spirituality: sitting cross-legged on the ground.
During graduate studies in theology, I had learned of
the spiritual significance embodied in images of the sitting
Buddha. But under the influence of Christian and Rolf
verticalism, I viewed such practices as earlier, less refined
stages of spiritual evolution. Moreover, until I lived in
New Mexico, I assumed that when native peoples sat on
the ground it was not like the aesthetic practice of zazen,
but because they were more primitive, lacking the niceties
of ordinary furniture and European manners. It soon became
clear that sitting in the sweat circle, meeting lodge,
or alone in the wilderness during fasts had evolved as a
spiritual practice for cultivating an intimacy with the earth
and a more egalitarian feeling for each other. I puzzled
that such sitting did not produce among the Pueblo dwellers
the kind of collapse that Western theorists said it
would; their torsos and heads were unusually erect, not
caved in like mine and so many of my Caucasian clients.
They also seemed to have qualities that are rare in the
Anglo world: a coyote irony, a mudhead lack of pretentiousness,
a com-mother easiness with human foibles.
Cross-legged sitting seemed to carry a sense of values that
could not be expressed solely in the vertical.

I do not mean to enshrine the cross-legged sitting
posture. As those of us with back problems know, it is
more difficult to get up from that posture. We know the
relief of sitting in a chair in contrast with having to sit for
long periods without support on the floor or ground. What
is at issue here is the exclusive identification of any particular
posture or direction with the spiritual. The point is to
have a multi-directional spirituality.
The Tewa, for example, sacralize directionality, not as
irrevocably linked to evolution or degradation, but as indicating
different spiritual challenges. Virtue and vice on the
multi-directional medicine wheel are not identified with one
direction rather than another. They invoke the uniquely
different challenges associated with different directions.
Journeys to the north involve learning how to survive in
extremes of temperature variation, keeping oneself warm in
the ice, snow and raging winds. Dealing with the south
requires one to learn to live with the relentless glare of the
sun, the always verdant vegetation with its fierce insects
and reptiles, the dank air. Looking to the east, one is faced
with the challenges of wakefulness, the beginnings of
illumination; to the west, with the inception of darkness,
the monsters of the night, the end.
The native elders, as much as Christians, are concerned
about human values—love, compassion, truth-telling, honoring
relatives, caring for the needy. They do not, however,
associate these virtues exclusively with uprightness, but
also with downwardness, frontwardness, backwardness,
sidewardness and round-aboutness.
In my encounters with the Rio Grande culture, I began
to get a sense that the institutions which shaped me were
trying to reach too high too fast, neglecting the more basic
realities of trees, animals, clear water and air. I became
aware of a weariness deep in my bones caused by an overreaching,
a world-weariness which I could see in other
Western idealists, Christian, Marxist, Freudian, and Positivist,
always rushing somewhere else in a hurry to change the
way things are, convinced that we possess the unique path
to Truth, failing in that Promethean rush to see the beauty
at hand, with its alternative truths. Attending the seasonal
rituals in the pueblos and hiking among Anasazi ruins in
the canyons of the Pajarito plateau were eroding my destiny-freighted
viewpoint that I belonged to a special community
in possession of the true story into which other stories
had to be translated.

In 1976, by strange coincidence I had as clients two
women who were about the same age and had remarkably
similar body-structures. One was Hopi, whom I will call
“Iris;” the other, Japanese-American, “Rowena.” They
both complained of extreme back pain, Iris in her lower
back; Rowena in her upper back and neck. Yet they both
had spinal columns which appeared to be nearly perfectly
straight That straightness puzzled me.
Ida Rolf, like many specialists in the area of body
structure, had argued that our evolution from primates
leaves us—that is, all human beings—in an awkward state
on the way towards the upright posture at which we have
not yet arrived. According to her and many other experts
in body structure, a major symptom of that unfinished
evolution is a frontward curvature, “lordosis,” of the vertebrae
of the lower back and neck. A well-known specialist
in physical medicine goes so far as to call these two lordotic
curvatures, “man’s antigravity destiny.”4
The manipulative techniques of Rolfing, which by then
I had practiced for five years, were designed to lengthen
the tissues surrounding those vertebrae with the goal of
freeing the spinal column to right itself towards the imaginary
plumb line of the Rolf Template. (Despite subtle
technical arguments about the precise shapes of the ideal
spinal contours, people like F. M. Alexander, Moshe Feld-
enkrais and Fran9oise M6zieres, including the schools of
chiropractic and osteopathy, structured their body manipulations
around similar goals.)
But after several sessions with Iris and Rowena within
the Rolf context, I could no longer avoid the fact that their
spinal columns did not have the destined antigravity
curves; theirs were virtually straight. I felt like I had
reached to open a door and, because the knob slipped off
into my hand as I stepped forward to walk through it, I
bumped right into it I was in darkness, not comprehending
what I saw and felt in their necks and lower backs.
Until I encountered these two women, there had been a
relatively easy relationship between my ideas of the body
and the feelings in my hands on another person. The way
that I organized my touching people from session to session
had produced generally good results, and I had some
confidence that I knew what I was doing. I had taken for
granted that everyone’s spinal column more or less followed
a relatively standard pattern of deviation from the
normal, based on the assumption that as human beings we
were all at the same stage of biological evolution. I also
took for granted that differences of perception and world
view followed a similar pattern of deviation from a set of
universal -truths valid for all. I had, of course, always
known that other people were different from me, often
radically so. But I had always assumed that those differences
were essentially superficial: although a person standing
on a mountain sees things differently from a person in
a swamp, the same kind of looker, with the same fundamental
structures, peers out of those two different locations.
At a deep level, all humans saw things the same
way, if they were honest according to the norms of Western
psychology, and their body structures were on the way
towards the Rolf Line.
It took an intimate meeting with two people from ancient
cultures different from my own to make me realize
that I could not inhabit anyone else’s viewpoint. Here I
knew that I could not see and feel things the way they did.
But not because of anything they said or any peculiar
feelings they expressed: in idiom, expression of emotions,
and life-style, they were as thoroughly Americanized as I
or any other of my clients. Outside of those sessions, it
would never have occurred to me that Iris and Rowena
were so foreign to my sensibilities. My humbling sense of
their otherness came exclusively from the rupture between
my sensations of them and the Rolf ideas guiding my
hands-on work.
In that conceptual blackout, I was forced to turn to
something more primal than the Template and Recipe. I
was left with bare intuition and simple sensations of my
hand touching them with more inquisitiveness than before.
I had to pay more attention to the subtle responses of their
flesh to my touch, and give more weight to their verbal
feedback, having to reach out to them more than usual,
asking them questions about their responses, about who
they were.
In the case of Rowena, the results of our work over a
period of three months were very modest, her neck pain
abating somewhat, but not enough to excite her about our
work. I was unable to make much headway in finding how
to contact her bodily tissues, or her personality in a meaningful
way. I eventually lost touch with her.
Things were different with Iris. Like myself, she was
stumbling her way along a rocky spiritual path. She had
been so frightened as a child by the spiritual powers of her
grandparents, that she had renounced the old ways and
opted for the life of a secular artist. But in recent years,
she was finding her way back to her culture, and was now
engaged in reviving the traditional Hopi methods of weaving
and pottery. Our interactions produced the sparks of
friendship. In that context of personal connection, I was
able to find subtle ways of using my hands to evoke movement
from the tissues deep within her bodily structure.
She experienced significant relief for her back pain from
our sessions and returned periodically for work over a
number of years.
Strangely enough, after my conceptually clear ways of
proceeding were disrupted by not knowing what to do next,
I felt more like Ida Rolf, who never seemed to be occupied
by external ideals, but was rather deeply in touch with the
uniqueness of the bodily tissues of the person with whom
she was working. For her and for other effective Rolfers
with whom I have worked over the years, the Template
functioned more as a background theme, with the felt sense
of the individual in the foreground. I had been so immersed
in the world of concepts that the Template captivated
an inordinate amount of my attention. Being forced to
find some other way of relating to these two women helped
me along the pilgrimage out of the brittle world of theories
into the immediacy of flesh and emotion.
In the attempt to make sense of what I was feeling and
seeing in Rowena and Iris, a glimmer of light came from
noticing that their physical structures were not completely
unfamiliar. Although they did not look like what Euro-
American physical experts said all spines looked like at
this point in evolution, they did remind me of other forms I
had seen. Iris mirrored what I had often seen among
inhabitants of the pueblos. Her physique had the unusual
combination both of solidity and grace that I had been
noticing when I was walking the narrow streets of Walpi or
Shungopavi, taking part in the bean dances, watching the
kachinas emerge from the kivas with the snow-capped San
Francisco peaks in the background. Rowena reminded me
of images I had seen in Asian art, dance, and meditation
postures.
From my earlier studies of Renaissance philosophy, I
was familiar with the perception of the human body as the
microcosmic reflection of the cosmos, an image which I
took to be biological and soulful: the cellular intricacies of
the body contained all of the intricacies that one could find
in the universe; the soul by virtue of its capacities to question
and love, was a representation of the spiritual vastness
of reality. But here I was confronted with the macroculture
in the microculture. My contact with each of these women
was not simply a matter of one person touching another
with certain therapeutic goals in mind, nor just the interaction
between two people complicated by the psychodynamics
of unique family histories, one male the other female,
with all of those complications. It was an encounter between
two different embodiments of ancient rituals, culturally
sanctioned postures and movement patterns, cuisine,
attitudes towards sexuality, disease, birth and death.
At this our fin de siecle, we know a lot about the dangers
inherent in such meetings. On the one hand, there are
the outbursts of creativity which one finds in the coming
together of artists, scientists, athletes, spiritual teachers, and
community organizers from different cultures. But there
are also the many forms of colonization where the practices
of one culture are subsumed by another, co-opted, brutalized,
even eliminated.
My reflections on my work with Iris and Rowena made
me painfully aware that I had deceived myself in thinking
that I had left behind missionary zeal when I put aside my
Jesuit soutane. I was confronted by the humbling realization
that the colonial mentality existed deeper within my
neuropeptides. I was still engaged in an attempt to convert
people to a particular view of the world. Instead of using
my skills to help my clients find their unique ways to
respond to the challenges offered by their own histories to
liberate and enrich their own points of view, I was attempting
to mold them into someone else’s notions about experience.
I had taken the Rolf Line for the privileged path to
Truth, applicable to all people, when, in fact, it is just an
unusually useful symbol created by an upper middle-class
Long Island woman, inspired by some sixty years of successful
healing work almost exclusively with upper-class
white people in the United States and Great Britain. It has
neither more nor less relation to absolute truth than many
other ideals.
As I attempted to extricate myself from the confusions
provoked by trying to alleviate the pain of Iris and Rowena,
I came across the work of a small group of scholars
who have organized their research around die brief 1933
essay of Marcel Mauss, “Les techniques du corps” By
“techniques of the body,” Mauss meant the wide range of
activities which shape the protean body of the infant into
an adult, ranging from styles of caring for infants, to gender
formation, styles of work, exercise, sexual postures,
dance and ritual. He argued that these activities, which
seem so “natural,” are actually highly articulated expressions
of a particular culture’s values; if you examine any
particular technique such as using a shovel, you will find
that the technique, and the body it goes towards shaping,
differ from culture to culture. During the past sixty years,
that thesis has been substantiated by a number of anthropological
researchers.5
Those events initiated me into what has now been a
twenty-year study of the variety of ways in which different
cultures organize their values, and how those values are
expressed in bodily practices. With my clients, I let myself
be drawn away from the overwhelming domination of
abstract ideas about body structure into primal senses of
body movement, of the feel of my palm on another’s skin,
and of the impact of another’s voice, leaving me with a
more intimate emotional contact with other persons and the
world. As my path veered in that direction, I was struck
by its profound capacities for healing the divisions that
haunt our personal relationships and our social world; it
was a path of common sense, uncluttered with the jabber of
centuries.
In light of those kinds of experiences my eventual
discovery of Emilie Conrad-Da’Oud felt like bumping into
a long-lost friend deep in back-country wilderness. I am
going to give some of the details of her life and the evolution
of her work as a way of showing how these multicultural
ideas about the body might be applied.
O
Emilie created her Somatics method, Continuum, when
she, like myself, found herself having to work her way out
of a squeeze between two cultures. Bom and raised in
Brooklyn during the thirties and forties, she says that she
was driven as an adolescent to look for something more
primal than she found in everyday life. At first she imagined
that she could find it in primitive dance, and began
studying with its leading teachers, Katherine Dunham,
Pearl Primus and Sevilla Fort She went to Haiti in 1955,
where she spent five years studying Haitian dance and
religion, even starting her own dance troupe there. A dark
Sephardic Jew, she became even darker, braiding her hair
and taking on the character of the Island women to such an
extent that Eastman-Kodak photographers on a search for
“beauties of the Caribbean,” photographed her. When she
returned to New York in 1960, she was confronted with
that photograph mounted on the Grand Central billboard
over the title “La Belle Creole.” She realized that something
drastic had happened to her in between the two cultures;
she describes it as entering a long-term existential
breakdown related to “the dissonance between the liquid,
organic rhythms of Haiti and the frantic, manufactured pace
of Manhattan.”
Without her realizing it, her physical appearance had
become so altered that she looked like a Haitian and was
unable to get the kinds of jobs that had been readily available
to her before she left New York. She turned to professional
modeling and the teaching of primitive dance.

On occasion, she and her troupe did performances in nightclubs
based on voodoo rituals. One night during an ecstatic
solo fire dance, she reports that she suddenly felt she
had “crossed over, beyond the possibility of ever coming
back.” That “crossing over” meant for her the breakdown
of her culture, with all of the categories of meaning and
bodily expression. The dissolution was so far reaching that
it would take her some years to create a replacement. In
the meantime, she had to put up with an uncomfortable,
sometimes almost psychotic sense of disorientation, which
she now attributes to the fact that she was strongly resisting
the implications of that deeper sense of her body for
the outlines of a new view of reality. Her anchor in reality
became a series of events in which she found herself returning
with increasing clarity into a primal area of experience.
In this disoriented condition, she entered into a new
marriage in 1963 and moved to Los Angeles. In 1964,
learning to drive for the first time, she lost control of her
VW bug convertible on the Santa Ana Freeway and collided
with a semi-truck. In the instant before collision, at
which point her VW was totally destroyed, her entire life
flashed in front of her. She felt a hand come down over
her and say “No!” She emerged from the wreckage without
a scratch, with the feeling that the “no” was a warning
that it was dangerous for her to continue fighting so hard
to hold away what she had learned from the cultural crossover.
Then in 1967, she finally went all the way into what
she calls her “black hole.” She describes herself as “falling
completely apart,” unable to get out of bed to go to her job
as a model. She continually felt dizzy and was besieged
by voices and visions. When she shut her eyes, a characteristic
feeling came upon her, followed by the appearance
of a “screen” before her eyes, on which she saw with great
clarity detailed scenes of ancient cultures. At the same
time, her body began to move in certain ways which she
recognized as what she was looking for when twenty years
before she set about studying primitive dance. It was her
good luck to have been in therapy with a psychiatrist who
did not view her experience as pathological, but recognized
it as an interim condition between systems of meaning, one
of which had lost its sense, the other of which was just
beginning to form. Confident that she was bringing something
forth, he encouraged her to go into her visions and
try to make sense of them.
She describes her crisis as falling into a crack between
two cultures and finding her own body underneath the
cultural forms of each. “I had to give up everything I
believed. I saw that what I called ‘my body’—how I
moved, talked, even how I thought—was a cultural imprint.
With all my training, I had been teaching ‘my body’ to
dance. But deep inside there was already a dance going
on, if I would perceive it—a dance of myriad movement
forms beyond anything I could think of. I had to feel it. I
had to let it guide me.”6
I want to underscore the commonplace illusion that
took so long for Emilie to unravel. It is the notion that
“New York” represents a complex, highly evolved cultural
form while primitive dance is “natural.” (For Emilie and
other Somatics theorists, “natural” meant “better,” while for
other people, it means “of less value.” Neither view is
accurate.) Lying in her bed, moving to her visions and
voices, she realized that both New York and Haiti are
equally sophisticated cultural forms, each shaping the raw
materials of life. Her long sought-after “primitive” had
always existed in movements which are occurring in us
willy nilly: cellular, respiratory, circulatory, peristaltic,
nervous, lymphatic, micro-muscular.
As with other Somatics innovators like Alexander,
Feldenkrais, and Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen, it took Emilie
several years to distill those experiences into a definitive
method. The first stage was in response to people who
asked her to teach primitive dance, which she used as a
vehicle for teaching those more basic kinds of movements.
A second crucial stage was her puzzling about the nature
of paralysis. If the very essence of material reality is
movement, what does it mean when a person has a pathology
that manifests itself in immobility?
With that question in mind, she began working with
people with severe neuromuscular disorders, and from them
learned more clearly what was involved in her own experiences.
She worked with a twenty-three year old woman,
Susan, who had been partially paralyzed by polio since age
one. She had always been told by physicians that she
would never recover movement in her left leg, because
current medical belief assumes that polio causes muscles
and nerves to degenerate in such a way that the paralysis is
irreversible. Working without any familiar concepts of
spinal alignment to guide her, as I had been forced to do
with Iris and Rowena, Emilie simply stayed present with
her hands on the young woman’s body. She sat like this
for hours at a stretch, giving no instructions, not even
guiding her in visualizations. At first, Susan felt only heat.
Then one day the leg began to shudder and move in
strange ways that were similar to the ways that Emilie had
found herself moving in her bed. Over a four-year period
of weekly four-hour sessions, many of which were observed
and subjected to electromyographical analysis in the
UCLA kinesiology laboratory, Susan manifested a range of
subtle and finely articulated movements.
Emilie’s experience with Susan and similar cases led
her to recognize the healing capacities in movements that
are not ordinarily attended to in the public world, in fact
movements that a culture may not even recognize as movements.
“Paralyzed people,” she writes, “can feel movement
inside their bodies, but because our culture does not value
this kind of movement, they think they cannot move.
Helping Susan get in touch with the movement within her
atrophied leg allowed the inner movement to surface and
ripple across the skin and eventually enabled Susan to lift
her leg.”7
Another clue came to Emilie from her inner voices, one
saying to her: “Your movement is too muscular; sound will
lead you into a more refined level of movement” She
realized how easy it is for a person who deliberately undertakes
movement—exercise, dance, sports, even “Sensory
Awareness”—to adopt a familiar muscular pattern. She
began to use sound to find something else. She would
deliberately create unfamiliar sounds such as those resulting
from directing sounds far back in the throat or vibrating
the tongue against the palate. She would sit and observe
the kinds of movements that would be generated
throughout the interior of the body, allowing those movements
to reverberate, sometimes to the point of moving her
body in space.
On the basis of those experiences, her work evolved
from teaching primitive dance and working as a hands-on
healer to a radically simplified form she calls Continuum,
with which she helps large groups of people experience
natural though unfamiliar movements, and explore how
those movements might affect everyday life. She might
have a group spend several hours initiating the tiniest
movements of a finger or knee and then exploring the
ripples of subtle reactions put into action by those micromovements.
Or she might suggest spending hours, even
days, making tiny, virtually inaudible sounds, observing
their effects throughout the interior regions of the body.
Like Rolfing, the experiences of Continuum are radically
sensual; they are not visualizations, images or ideas.
They seduce one’s attention from the chatter of inner conversations
and the barrage of colorful images, as Buddhist
meditation does, deep into the immediacy of a specific
movement. At the same time, the consciousness provoked
by that sensual attention has the qualities that mystics have
traditionally identified with the spiritual: the dissolution of
experienced barriers between self and other, body and
mind, self and physical world.
While I had found that many anthropologists and scientists
had studied the embodiment of culture, Emilie was the
first whose actual method of Somatics reflected those ideas.
Hers is a deconstructive work that allows one to probe into
the more basic movements that have given rise to a particular
cultural form. Different spiritual traditions have put
their attention on one or a few primal movements—sitting,
breathing, sensing. Over time, sometimes centuries, they
develop their rituals and meditation practices by collective
repetition and refinement of that family of movements.
The resultant experiences produced their culturally unique
somatospiritual practices: zazen, hatha yoga, t’ai chi
chu’an, sufi whirling, the hesychastic breathing of Russian
Orthodox mystics. As the practices grow older and become
more formalized, their roots in the more basic spontaneous
movements are forgotten. Continuum, not unlike
Edmund Husserl’s eidetic phenomenology,8 teaches a person
how to investigate any particular form, ranging from
meditation postures to forms of calisthenics, and find one’s
way into the primal movements that have become somatically
conceptualized in that particular way.
An impossible separation between “nature” and “culture”
is not the issue here. The words that have seemed
apt both for my own experiences and for Emilie’s are
functional ones like “basic,” “simple,” “primal.” When I
lost a sense of what to do in my work with Ms and Rowe-
na, I had to turn to simpler forms of touch, seeing and
listening. In the depths of what she calls the “black hole”
of her existential breakdown, Emilie let herself move in
even more idiosyncratic ways than she had learned in
“primitive” dance, using movements that do not appear on
the maps of Western medical kinesiology.

The rapid proliferation of inter-cultural knowledge at
this moment in history has evoked a number of responses.
One is to try for a homogenization of human beings, reducing
them to the lowest common denominators: Levi’s,
McDonald’s, Madonna. Another is to retreat in fear into
enclaves of one’s own kind, churches, walled suburbs, and
rococo theologies. Still another is to junk one’s own culture
and adopt the costumery of another. None of these
moves are promising for healing the ragged tears in our
social fabric; they are, rather, movements of despair.

A turn to more primal realities could lay the groundwork
for methods of joining with people of many cultures
and ideologies in journeys of investigation into how we
might deal with common problems of hunger, disease,
broken relationships, and a poisoned environment. And
how we might celebrate our shared delight in clear air and
water, in touching and being touched with affection, in care
for one another.


----------------

DANCING THE BODY 
by Elizabeth Dempster

interview with choreographer Russell Dumas


RUSSELL DUMAS has danced with
some of the major dance companies of
the world including The Royal Ballet,
Ballet Rambert, Netherlands Dance
Theatre and the Companies of Twyla
Tharp and Trisha Brown. For the
past fourteen years he has choreographed
in Australia as director of
Dance Exchange.
Defining his role as a choreographic
artist in broad yet rigorous
terms, he has been active not only as a
choreographer, performer and teacher,
but as a critical analyst, dance theorist
and writer. More recently the Dance-
link program, established by Dumas in
1985, has seen him functioning as a
kind of cultural ambassador, promoting
and coordinating international
exchange between dance artists from
the USA, Europe, Asia and Australia.
Speaking of his own choreographic
practice Dumas says that he is not
interested in dance in the typical mimetic
or narrative form, but rather one
that poses and explores questions. In
his approach to making dances he
uses ideas drawn from various cultures,
practices and disciplines such as
anthropology, philosophy, and film. In
the final realisation of his choreography,
however, he is a purist, preferring
to show the dance movement
alone without dependence on other art
forms.
For Russell Dumas, dance is not a
peripheral entertainment but is central
to the business of living. His work in
Australia has been directed to the
realisation of his vision of dance as a
powerful and resonant cultural force,
a means by which we might come
more fully to comprehend, celebrate
and debate our society and our world.
In this interview Russell Dumas
outlines the development of his choreographic
philosophy and method
with a detailed discussion of a number
of recent works.
Rough Curs (mo)
DEMPSTER: Could we talk about the
structure and development of your
piece Rough Cuts? How was the
original material generated?
DUMAS: Rough Cuts was built from
ten phrases of increasing length—the
first phrase was a one count, the second,
two counts and so on. Each of
the phrases dealt with a particular
kinaesthetic memory or movement
experience and some of them referred
back to specific moments in my own
dance history. For example, one
phrase relates to my work with Trisha
Brown. This movement is for me
quintessentially Trisha—something to
do with looseness in the joints. In
another phrase there is an aikido-like
movement from Rose-Marie Wright
(of the Twyla Tharp company). The
fourth phrase was something to do
with childhood memories and the
movement of waves—the breaking and
throwing and spreading and drawing
back of waves, the body drawing
diagonal lines like body surfing.
These phrases are like sentences, very
particular, very precisely drawn. The
process of refining the material involved
taking movement back to an
origin, the often forgotten thing it was
anchored in. The movement was
etched in my body and I was concerned
to be able to show its derivation.
DEMPSTER: How did that relationship
between movement and memory express
itself in the development of the
phrases? Did you find movement first,
which then triggered memory, or vice
versa?
DUMAS: Well, it was a bit of both.
Some of the material was arrived at
intuitively, while some was worked on
quite consciously. But the original
phrases were made fairly quickly and
this was pleasurable to do. The next
stage was about distancing myself
from that material by applying a grid
[Figure 1]. This is quite an arbitrary
process and it is something I first
encountered with Twyla. Her intent
was different from mine; she didn’t
use the grid with such a dancerly
focus. A process like this would be
just one part of a whole armament of
techniques and devices she deployed at
various times to alter material.
What interested me in working
with this grid structure was the possibilities
it suggested for juxtaposition of
information embodied in the individual
movement phrases, and the making of
new information and new insights
from that juxtaposition. The process
was partly about displacing the techniques
implicit in the original material.
To illustrate what I mean by that:
if you study say Graham technique
intensively you’ll tend to reproduce a
Graham-like style of movement. The
more persuasive the physical technique,
the stronger its influence will
be. If you don’t separate yourself
from it, the technique indelibly marks
your body, your mind and your kinaesthetic
memory. When you apply a
grid structure such as this you open up
gaps between yourself and the technique;
you make other choices available.
DEMPSTER: The two stages—first
making the movement phrases and
then using them as the basis for another
compositional process—were quite
separately conceived and executed?
DUMAS: Yes, and each of the phrases
was also developed autonomously.
The rhythmic structure and the counts
are not consistent across the ten phrases,
and I didn’t make cuts from one
phrase to the next so that they could
fit easily. The transitions that I was
interested in were the most difficult,
the most virtuosic, and not those that
were most natural or inevitable. Of all
the many possibilities presented by the
grid I’d look at the most difficult
physical transitions and choose to do
those. You’d have a ten count phrase
that was almost physically impossible
and therefore this would be the most
interesting to do.
DEMPSTER: The materials you begin
with are not at all simple, but they
have an organic, kinetically logical
feel about them. Using the grid you
embark upon a complex process of
first defamiliarising, and then ‘naturalising’
or reclaiming that material as
your own.
DUMAS: Yes. The body takes over
again. The intellectual labour undertaken
in learning the new coordinations
is made bodily; it’s dropped to
the muscles and becomes part of the
bodily memory. I was interested in
the idea of the intelligence of the body
making sense of what were quite arbitrary
cuts. But I didn’t want it to
remain a conscious thing and to present
someone dancing in a very intellectual
way. The movement had to be
reassimilated into the body so that it
came out seamlessly.
DEMPSTER: How long did you work on
the piece and in what form was it
finally presented?
DUMAS: Stephanie St. Clair and I
worked on it for months. The eighteen
minute duet alone took five
months, and we did nothing else during
that time. The permutations were
endless and we eventually decided that
it was counter-productive to continue
to explore new possibilities. We
reached the limit of what we could do
organically, and so made some decisions
so that it didn’t continue to be
an intellectual thing while we were
dancing. Nevertheless right up to the
point of performing it we were rehearsing
with bits of paper. The material
kept escaping; it was very slippery,
very difficult and we kept having
to go back to our notebooks and plans.
The duet was built by following
alternate lines through the grid and
where phrases passed from one to the
other we made bridging sections.
Sometimes we swapped materials—
Stephanie would take my phrase and I
would take hers. It became highly
complex.
The piece was originally presented
Downstairs at the Seymour Centre. I
set up three video monitors in the
space and the piece began with the
original phrases on video. The video
was meant to evoke the past of the
material and to present it in its first
very concrete form. I also wanted to
have music present, but as a memory
or trace. Again this was a connection
to childhood and my experience of
music examinations, waiting in corridors,
hearing fragments of music from
behind closed doors. So what I did
was to locate the music in an adjacent
room. There was a grand piano in a
room off a corridor adjacent to the
performing area, and throughout the
piece a pianist practised Bach, going
over and over particular figures and
passages. The piece started with the
material on video monitors, the music
started somewhere into that, then
Stephanie began a solo, and the duet
followed.
DEMPSTER: Would you consider reconstructing
Rough Cuts, performing it
as a full-length work again?
DUMAS: Not this one. All I will get
back from it is the solo you saw the
other day. That’s stuck forever in my
memory. It’s like a raft to the past;
and the pleasure of performing it again
is in the memory it evokes, memory
that is particular because I can still
trace its origins. I can go back to the
origins of the movement and although
the dance no longer looks like the
original it has a certain smell, feel,
perfume, texture which evokes those
particular parts of my memory. When
it falls apart and I can’t remember the
sequencing, all I’ve got to do is concentrate
on locating the memory of a
particular move. If I find one physical
move clearly enough it will spark my
kinaesthetic memory and that one
moment can in turn cue the whole
phrase.
That solo links me in a direct way
to eight years ago, but I dance it now
with a body that is eight years older
and which has had other experiences,
other insights.


On Virtuosity, Training,
and the Persona of the
Performer


DEMPSTER: A work like Rough Cuts
makes precise technical demands upon
the dancer, but the dancer’s skill will
not necessarily be apparent to a viewer;
the virtuosity is not displayed as
such. Was it your intention to mask
the virtuosity involved in the dancing
or was this effect simply the logical
outcome of the process embarked upon
in that work?
DUMAS: Well it was both. I have
always been interested in virtuosity
and in what I couldn’t quite do, but I
didn’t see much value in virtuosity as
it has been traditionally defined in
dance. The limits that people often
define virtuosity by—the entrechat, for
example—always seemed to me to be
fairly dumb, too obvious or just vulgarly
muscular. They represent a very
limited notion of the body’s capacity
and potential. It seemed to me that the
body had all kinds of abilities that we
didn’t use.
In Rough Cuts the dancing was at
times like a series of stumbles that this
intelligent body was recovering from.
We threw ourselves from one dangerous
thing to another and it may have
appeared as if we were just making it
up in the moment The idea of the
body being able to make sense of all
these disparate things interested me. I
wanted to explore the body’s innate
ability to respond to the questions and
problems it was presented with.
Sometimes those questions and problems
involved, or at least implied, a
psychological dimension. The demands
the dance made upon the dancer
weren’t always or only physical. It
was often to do with memory and the
ability not only to organise and order
but to recall sensation and feeling
precisely.
What I was interested in then and
what I continue to be interested in
today—in some ways what I am calling
virtuosity—is related to the information
that has emerged from disciplines
like Todd alignment and the
Alexander Technique. My notion of
virtuosity is informed by knowledge
drawn from those sources; it is very
much to do with efficiency of action.
DEMPSTER: Traditional dance techniques
presume not only defined standards
and types of technical proficiency
but also particular styles of delivery
or performance presence on the part
of the dancer. Rough Cuts is developed
from heterogeneous sources,
insofar as the original ten phrases are
linked to very different periods of your
own history. In performing this work
you’re slipping between many different
experiences and different kinds of
dance materials.
These materials in their original
form suggest very contrasting ideas
about the persona of the performer
and the nature of technical expertise
required of him or her. But the work
when performed is not at all eclectic.
DUMAS: In order to perform the material
and to achieve some organic unity
in the dancing, I had to look outside
traditional techniques and the information
afforded by them. I had to focus
on joint action, on thoroughly analysing
how the actions worked. This
process has led me to new insights
about the body, about physical virtuosity
and about training.
In this respect my work is very
much a product of what happened in
the 1960s and 1970s, to the idea of the
body in dance, and to ideas concerning
the training of the body. These ideas
focused upon functionality and the
aesthetics of function. The idea of
dealing with what was appropriate
particularly interested me. It meshed
with my experience of Japanese culture
and with my understanding of
Haiku. What was appropriate work
was not always the most beautiful.
Movement had to have a certain robustness.
It was beautiful because of
its use; it was beautiful in use. In
some sense I feel that my background
in classical ballet predisposed me to a
certain kind of culturally outmoded, or
partially outmoded form—a kind of
high courtly tradition which seemed to
have lost its way. The traditional
dance techniques we had were all
about control and mastery of the body;
gravity was to be conquered. The new
techniques that I was introduced to in
the 1970s acknowledged the subjectivity
of the dancer. Time was invested
in the experience of sensation and
feeling. These techniques gave value
to the sense of trusting the body, of
returning to the body as authority,
rather than it being something that had
to be overcome. The body information
that was surfacing in modem
dance in the 1960s and 1970s had
been around earlier but came through
as a rich vein at that time because the
culture opened up to it That period
opened up other possibilities for bodies
and for dance. New energies were
released and artists were looking for
ways of incorporating the new information
into dancing.
So, in a work like Rough Cuts for
example, I was balancing bones, I was
seeing how much I could free muscles
to reflect emotions, to reflect thoughts
so that they shimmered off the body,
off the movement I felt these ideas
and approaches to dance allowed for a
much more complex relationship between
things, not simply a one-on-one,
illustrative connection between movement,
thought and emotion. The mind
works on all kinds of levels. I get
little pleasure from dance which doesn’t
acknowledge that complexity and
subtlety.

Dancing
(1987)

DEMPSTER: I am interested in your
idea of training your dancers through
repertory. At the outset of the Dancing
Sara’s Phrases project you informed
your dancers that there wasn’t
to be any training other than that
implicit in the learning of the dance.
This approach to the development of
dance and dancers would seem to be
fundamental to much of the work you
do. How do you see the relationship
between your choreography, the work
that’s produced, and the training that
your dancers are undergoing?

DUMAS: It’s a broad principle; it
shouldn’t be taken to refer to a single
piece. The idea is that the most effective
training for a dancer is the production
of work and that in the
endeavour to get that work out the
dancers are exposed to rigorous processes.
I have a vested interest in
making sure they understand what my
intentions are. If they don’t understand
they can’t articulate the work,
their bodies won’t have the resonance
that I am interested in. And yet they
can’t have my experiences, so it’s a
matter of communicating my understanding
and encouraging them to find
experience akin to this in their own
lives.
Often when experience is codified
into a dance technique the sense of it
being a lived experience is diminished.
The process of codification reduces the
richness of experience. It becomes a
series of muscular sets which speak
primarily of a certain kind of achievement
and mastery. Other resonances,
other meanings are excluded.
DEMPSTER: When dancers come to
work with you either from a school or
another company situation where the
division between technique and training,
and rehearsal and performing is a
matter of convention and often quite
rigidly made, they must find it confronting
and confusing to work in this
rather more open-ended and yet intensive
way.
DUMAS: Yes, I am asking them to see
their lives implicated in the work. I
ask them to identify how they have
come to the information and beliefs
they have about the body and dance;
what kind of culture has caused them
to think that they have to stand a
particular way and not feel, for example.
If you ask people to start thinking
from the body outwards and to have a
sense of the spine—this is much more
a modem dance idea—you are asking
them to dance their bodies, rather than
to parade on top of their well turned-
out legs. To dance with a sense of the
spine, to dance the body, you have to
feel with your body, and in order to
feel you come up against all sorts of
social conditioning. This is especially
true for men, who have been taught
that to show feeling is unmasculine.
DEMPSTER: You have directed a number
of large group performance projects,
the Mackie Project (1980) and
Distinguishing Features (1983)
amongst them. These projects were
directed towards the education and
training of dance artists and not the
development of your own choreographic
work per se. What kinds of
issues or problems were you hoping to
address through these programs?
DUMAS: When I looked at dance here
[in Australia] with its limitations and
lack of development, I came to the
conclusion that many of the problems
were the result of the training available
to people. With the Mackie Project
as well as giving people some
insights into choreographic process I
was trying to give experience which
would encourage dancers to know that
they have a value when they are not
dancing. The way we learn to dance
results in the idea that you are only a
dancer when you are dancing, that is,
when you are doing steps. Who are
you when you’re not doing chasee pas
de bouree? Your worth as a dancer is
evaluated in terms of your ability to
do these technical things all the way
through your training, and suddenly
when you become a soloist or principal
you’re told that in fact it’s something
else. It’s always something else,
but that something else is never talked
about or specified and it is assumed
that this ‘something’ will just miraculously
be there when it’s required.
But the actual process of getting to the
point where you are required to exhibit
this ‘something else’ almost kills any
confidence that something else exists.
You have been undermined all the way
through about your own worth as a
person, as a thinking person with
opinions which have been physically
wrought. In America I saw that people
were encouraged in their endeavour
to be artists. What they thought
and how they felt mattered because
that in effect was the substance of
their art. As a dance artist, your body,
your mind is the filter for experience,
and in America the individual is acknowledged
as the centre, the source
of the art.
With the Mackie Project I had also
wanted to see whether American experience—the
concepts and techniques
that certain American artists had
evolved to meet their culture—could
be transferred here and what the consequence
of this would be. I finally
concluded that it wasn’t entirely useful
in that it produced rather peculiar
aberrations in sensibility. People here
developed some facility and were able
to refer to things—choreographic
processes and concepts, new physical
perceptions and skills—but without
any real understanding of where these
things had come from, how they had
evolved, what preceded them and
where they might lead.
On Australian Experience
and No P o in t s in Tim e (1988)
DEMPSTER: What is your response to
the criticism that has been levelled at
you from time to time to the effect
your work is overly influenced by
American dance and is somehow ‘un-
Australian’ ?
DUMAS: When I show work in New
York it is perceptibly different from
the work that is happening there and
yet when I return to Australia the
same work is misconstrued as a mere
borrowing of New York dance. The
suspicion is that because I’ve worked
with Twyla Tharp and Trisha Brown
my work is just some pale imitation of
theirs. To a New York audience it is
absolutely evident that this is not the
case; my past experience with those
companies is not even commented
upon. In Australia, with the absence
of real reference points, the suspicion
is always there.

Australian-ness, in the sense of
overt Australian content doesn’t surface
in my work. But I’m not any less
‘Australian’ for the fact that the questions
I am asking are more subtle.
The Australian experience is not a
singular, homogeneous one.
DEMPSTER: Critic Andrea Borsay has
described your recent work No Points
in Time (1988) as ‘an eloquent statement
of cultural displacement’. A
concern with questions of origin and
literacy has emerged as a fairly persistent
theme in our discussion today.
It would seem to suggest that your
interest in an examination of colonial
experience, of what it means to live
and work as an artist in Australia, is
neither new nor specific to No Points
in Time, but has been an integral part
of much of your choreographic exploration.
Seen in this light your work
could be read as a cultural critique,
an analysis of Australian experience.
DUMAS: In a sense that is inevitable;
the dances reflect aspects of my life,
of what has happened to me. It shows
up as a symptom in the work I produce.
DEMPSTER: Is it merely a symptom of
your condition, or Australia’s condition
for that matter? These questions
have been quite consciously tackled as
issues in certain of your dances, and
in my view your work does represent a
quite thorough cultural analysis. Because
Australian society is not familiar
with the language you are using, the
work is not generally received and
discussed in these terms.
DUMAS: I might be tackling it, but it’s
still a symptom; I am still exhibiting
symptoms of cultural dislocation and
isolation. There’s no way that I can
avoid manifesting that. The most
interesting thing for me is both to
exhibit it and attempt to understand it.
In the endeavour to understand why I
feel this way, I understand something
about Australia, and about what it
means to be an Australian and to live
and work here.
DEMPSTER: Tell me about the title No
Points in Time..
DUMAS: I find the expression ‘at this
point in time’ rather silly—I don’t like
it—so what I’m saying is that there
are no points in time. My rejection of
that expression is also linked to the
idea of another concept of time—the
thought that Australia is the oldest
continent. It is a land that is relatively
unwritten in European terms; two hundred
years of European experience is
insignificant in a temporal sense.
The title was meant to evoke some
of those things. There is also a bit of
a play around ipointes\ It’s a rather
tangential reference to a statement by
Dame Peggy van Praagh: “if it’s not
en pointe it’s not real dance”—meaning,
if it’s not ballet, it’s not worth
considering.
DEMPSTER: With the scrims, frames
and projected images in No Points in
Time, another sense of time is introduced
into the performance. What is
the relationship between these different
elements—the live, the projected, the
present, the past, the static, the moving?
DUMAS: The screens and projections
were partly to do with the idea of
veneers, and of surface—something
that receives projections in both a
literal and figurative sense. When I
was a kid I went to the movies and
mostly my access to art was through a
visual medium. We had a rather disembodied
connection to European and
American culture. My experience of
art wasn’t to do with the spoken word
but with what was written and what
was represented visually, through
pictures, through the movies. This is
how things were communicated over
distance. What I was wanting to do
with the visual material was to echo
that kind of experience. Using projected
images to create a veneer, a
false or transient sense of depth; the
scrims suggest something that is superficial—present,
but not very solid.
The projections appeared at times to
create depth but were shadowy, insubstantial.
This material was also a
metaphor for memory which can seem
so substantial, so absolute, so sure and
yet something can flicker and it changes
dramatically.
DEMPSTER: Elements from different
periods of your own history come into
play in this work. I recognise material
from an early work, Blinky Bill
(1978), enfolded into the long duet
between yourself and Jo McKendry.
DUMAS: I keep working material and it
cycles through two or three or four
pieces, transformed and contextualised
differently each time until it’s finally
dropped out of the repertoire.
Circular Quay pm )
DEMPSTER: You once described the
work Circular Quay as a ploy. What
did you mean by that?
DUMAS: The ploy is in the name; it
was partly an attempt to counter a
tendency amongst critics who would
comment on seeing material reappear
in my work. They’d see a movement
phrase from one work in the next
work or maybe two years later and
there was this reaction: ‘oh we’ve seen
that movement before’. The movement
was distinctive and because it
was distinctive they’d recognise it,
whereas if it had been something from
classical ballet, it would be like tipping
a cup of water in the ocean.
When a choreographer uses something
like ballet he might rearrange,
modify or cut it up, but there is not a
sense of great personal investment in
the movement itself. There’s a notion
that a choreographer makes pieces like
this, by combining a given movement
vocabulary with theatrical ideas and
concerns. But I am primarily concerned
with movement, not the things
that might surround it. I am interested
in what movement itself means.
DEMPSTER: Was there a problem
stemming from the fact that modern
dance is associated with innovation,
with the idea of ‘the new’, so that
there was an expectation that each
work you produced would feature lots
of new movement content?
DUMAS: It was a problem specific to
Australia. Other people working here
were not concerned with the development
of movement material as such.
They were more concerned with dramatic
or theatrical ideas or with the
relationship between movement and
music. So that the projection for a
certain kind of innovation in movement
content was all onto me. In the
critics’ eyes it was almost like an area
that I owned and therefore if I wasn’t
continuing to develop and change and
delight every few months, well then
somehow I’d creatively dried up.
I got irritated by the sense that
what I was doing was always subjected
to that expectation; that I would
constantly change, that each thing I
did would be different from anything
else I’d done, that what I was doing
two months ago could somehow be
radically unconnected from my present
concerns. So I thought I’d turn the
tables and call all the work I produced
that year Circular Quay. I made two
or three bodies of material which I
showed in different manifestations,
ranging from a trio to a large group
work for sixteen dancers.
For me, making work is about
asking questions. Circular Quay
wasn’t about invention of language so
much as about using a language to ask
questions. What I was saying, basically,
was that I am an artist, I have
integrated concerns, the questions
giving rise to the present work come
out of the past and out of other questions
and other experience. I wanted
to make the point that what I am doing
here is work. I’m not making
separate ‘pieces’; I’m not interested in
dance in the typical narrative or mimetic
form and I don’t set out to illustrate
some already known thing to an
audience.
DEMPSTER: But at what point does
that ongoing work become a ‘piece’,
become presented as such?
DUMAS: Almost retrospectively. They
become fixed as pieces, and called
pieces because I make a video of
them, because they happen at eight
o’clock on a certain date.
DEMPSTER: Some of your works have
quite evocative and distinctive titles,
which would seem to suggest that the
dances are about specific subjects and
that your investigation is not purely a
formal one.
DUMAS: The titles are a way of reflecting
on and opening up other perspectives
to the viewer. Some of the
titles are evocative but they do not
describe the work. They are related to
the concerns that I’ve had during a
given period; they circulate around
them.
Circular Quay is a case in point
Circular Quay, in Sydney, is a place of
continuity and connection with European
experience. It was the place the
first fleet landed; it was the place that
ocean liners came into and departed
from. Quays generally are ports,
points of departure, places of comings
and goings, places where there is
inherent movement. I was also thinking
about the pervasiveness of ballet—the
way that ballet had colonised
Australia and how it continues to
connect us to British and European
experience.
DEMPSTER: So the title Circular Quay
refers to the character of that whole
year's work with its circulation of
ideas and materials, the comings and
goings of dancers and movement material.
Beyond that it speaks of the
place of the ballet in Australian dance
and in your own past—it’s a point of
departure.
To represent the ballet as ‘quay’
implies connection and continuity, but
paradoxically, it also suggests discontinuity,
and dislocation from European
cultural experience.
DUMAS: Circular Quay is a play
around all those themes.
DEMPSTER: To return for a moment to
the question of recycling and reworking
material. The duet which concludes
Giselle 2000 reappears two
years later in No Points in Time, and
in this second context its meaning is
much more diffuse, and ambiguous. In
Giselle 2000 the duet can be read, if
one chooses to do so, as a comment
upon the historical narrative—as a
death at the hand of the Queen of The
Wilis, if you like. Whereas when it
occurs in No Points in Time it is much
less open to narrative interpretation.
DUMAS: In a couple of pieces, I’ve used
this duet material which I’ve come to
call ‘post-modern death’. It is just two
men slowly descending into the floor.
It wasn’t intended to be illustrative of
death per se. For me it was always a
much more ambiguous, complex image.
I saw it as a beautiful action in
itself, and there is a kind of sensual
pleasure associated with it and an
element of voyeuristic pleasure. But it
does also suggest death and decay.

When I was younger I didn’t talk
about death. As a child there is that
fear that your parents might die. You
don’t mention death because to do so
seems to be playing some kind of
game with chance. If you don’t articulate
it, it won’t happen, if you hold
your breath you can stop the sun moving
behind a cloud... There are these
little fragments from an imaginative,
magic realm which remain with me.
They are not logical, not rational. In
the past I was not interested in illustrating
decay or death or even, for that
matter, the idea of beautiful...any of
those myths, if you like. Gradually I
have felt a shift whereby I now find it
quite interesting to deal with those
‘big narratives’. I don’t have an overwhelming
desire to deal with them, but
there’s no longer the feeling that they
don’t matter, or that they are foreign
to me. They are relevant
Venues and Audiences
DEMPSTER: From the earliest days at
the Woolloomooloo Police Boys’ Club,
Dance Exchange’s concerts have been
presented in unconventional venues
such as gymnasiums, rehearsal studios,
town halls and such like. Unlike
some of your contemporaries you have
not made the move over to plusher,
more traditional theatre venues; you
continue to present your work in informal,
intimate and what might be
thought of as rather marginal spaces.
Your choice of performance venues
must be determined by financial considerations
to a degree but I assume
that it is also an aesthetic choice on
your part?
DUMAS: The whole notion of a ‘poor
theatre’ has been very influential and
the idea that ‘less is more’ always
appealed to me. These kinds of spaces
do have their problems but in the final
analysis the structures that surround
performance do prescribe what can be
said. When you come to a traditional
theatre the expectation of a particular
kind of experience is already established
through the architecture and
ambience of the building itself, with
its foyers, box office, ushers and everything.
It becomes harder and harder
to go outside the expectation that is
set up by that kind of venue. Your
audience in that situation is primed in
a particular way. Even if the work is
attempting something different, if it’s
put into that kind of package it’s already
coloured.
DEMPSTER: Who is your audience?
Who are you addressing?
DUMAS: I’d say that there would be
limited interest in my work amongst
the general dance audience in Australia.
I’m not sure that I could define
who my audience is, but I suspect it is
people who are more lively, who have
more questions of their culture. Often
that would mean an arts audience, a
visual arts audience, people more
interested in critical debate.
On Modernism and Post-
Modernism
DEMPSTER: In your critical writing
you have noted that one of modern
dance’s most significant contributions
has been to establish and promote the
idea of the individual choreographic
artist. You also state that the modern
dance choreographer is concerned
with the development of an integrated
mind/body expression; this expression
is individual but also broadly written
in the culture.
To represent the individual artist
as origin, measure, and centre of the
art of dance, would seem to be appropriate
to the early moderns—certainly
they chose to represent themselves in
that way—but it wouldn’t seem to me
to be quite accurate to continue to
represent the art and individual artists
in that way today. It’s a model which
I associate with a particular era in
modern dance—that of Graham and
Humphrey—and I don’t think later
moderns—Cunningham, for example—
would describe themselves in those
terms.
DUMAS: Partly when I say things
categorically like that it is in order to
clarify a point, particularly in the
Australian context where the distinction
between ballet and the art of the
modem dance choreographer has been
insufficiently understood. But I don’t
really subscribe to the notion of the
unique, special individual, the individual
artist as origin. It was the way the
art was spoken of in the past and then
it seemed to be much more a statement
of the integrity of the artist, an
integrity which was perceived to be
linked to his or her uniqueness. Today
we have come to view these notions as
mythological or distorting.
56 Contact Quarterly
DEMPSTER: Where do'you locate yourself
within the modernist tradition in
dance? Could the term post-modern
be usefully applied to your work?
DUMAS: There are problems in using
any term in an Australian context
where we lack any real connection
with the social and historical circumstances
from which they arose and to
which they refer. Some of the concerns
in some of the dances that I
make could be described as post-modernist,
some of them are not. But it’s
not really an issue for me.
DEMPSTER: It is a label that is often
attached, perhaps in some instances
appropriately, to your work. And
certain of your choreographies especially
those involving a deconstruction
of tradition—I’m thinking of Local
Motion (1985) and Giselle 2000—do
sit very much within post-modernist
debates.
DUMAS: Partly what interests me at the
moment is working with an awareness
of what is received, of what audience
expectations are of dance. But I’m
interested in shifting the ground rules
around a bit, making gaps. In Giselle
2000 for example, I wanted to make a
work that was very difficult for the
performer, that drew upon the stuff of
the classical duet, of classicism, but
that took it all slightly off, out of
kilter. Because it has that inbuilt
discomfort, the material is extremely
hard. It’s never really possible to
master and you can never really perform
it with the authority it would
traditionally be invested with.
With processes and strategies of
deconstruction it’s necessary to have a
certain investment in the thing you are
denying. It’s partly that you have to
affirm it, in a sense; you need to be
able to speak the language of the
practice you are questioning and reassessing
in order to be comprehensible.
DEMPSTER: Another aspect of postmodernist
compositional strategy
which I’d like to discuss is the idea of
bricolage—of collecting bits and pieces,
drawing materials from diverse
sources and periods. A number of
your choreographies (Rough Cuts,
Local Motion, Giselle 2000) reveal
something like a principle of bricolage
at work in the selection and organisation
of materials. However your work
does not display the eclecticism and
tendency towards pastiche which has
become so predominant a feature in
New York post-modernism. In choreographing,
as you have explained earlier
in this interview, you do not begin
with a central idea or unifying theme
from and around which materials are
generated and structured. But there is
an organic, kinaesthetic logic in your
dancing and in performance which
tends to modify any sense of structural
discontinuity and fragmentation. The
rigour of your rehearsal process—
specifically the detailed attention given
to movement—brings about great
clarity and purity in the movement and
this quality, ironically perhaps, given
the critics’ propensity to label your
work “post-modern,” gives a sense of
unity and integration, and often rich
emotional resonance to the work.
DUMAS: I think that some artists—
whether it’s luck, intuition, whatever—pick
particular things for this
process of bricolage which are resonant,
which strike some chord with
others. It’s a question of the consciousness
with which the artist comes
to the work—and I would not discredit
the notion of the unconscious artist by
any means. It’s an intuitive thing.
The artist is of his time, what he is
doing is guided by a trust in intuition,
which is not at all the same thing as
saying that he just took this, this and
this. There is something which predisposes
the choice.
Perhaps having lived through this
range of different experiences I could
make very careful selections .of material
according to its ability to evoke
other times and other places. Perhaps
I might succeed in achieving some
kind of resonance through this calculated
bricolage. But I’d find that very
manipulative and the fact is I don’t
know exactly how the dances work; I
don’t presume to be able to do that
consciously.

----------------

MORE THOUGHTS ON SCIENCE AND THE IMPROVISING MIND
by Kent De Spain


INTRODUCTION
Movement improvisation is a form of research, a
way of peering into the complex natural system that is a
human being. It is, in a sense, another way of "thinking,"
but one that produces ideas impossible to conceive in stillness.
Improvisation, as an avenue of inquiry, seems to be
almost entirely the domain of its practitioners. Almost no
one outside of our field has found it sufficiently interesting
to make it the subject of scientific or philosophic study. Yet,
in my opinion as both mover and writer, some of the questions
posed by instantaneous physical composition are
fundamental to our understanding of what it is to be human:
What is "consciousness" when the body is in motion?
What is the role of culture in our decision-making processes?
How much of what we do can be considered an act of
will? How can we both be open to and edit so many channels
of information (psychological, aesthetic, kinesthetic, etc.)
at the same time? How can the results of our creative
labors be both original and coherent?
The "mind" behind the moving (and by "mind" I mean
an integrated "body/mind") is the pivotal issue for me.
That is why I was both pleased and intrigued by the report
by Christina Svane and Robert Schwarz in the last issue of
CQ, about their seminar in Amsterdam on "Space, Movement,
and Meaning." This event not only showed us a nondancing
theorist interested in movement improvisation, but
an intense and fruitful dialogue that arose between idea,
movement manifestation of idea, and the dancer/theorist's
experiences of those moving ideas.
Most exciting for me was the brief presentation, at the
end of the article, of Schwarz's model for the mind during
improvisation. This model seemed to be based on three
images or concepts: the "holographic" brain; a "fractal
hierarchy" of changes over time; and the role of cultural
conditioning. I was deeply moved by these ideas because
Schwarz, working independently in a different field, had
arrived at a description strikingly parallel to a model that I
had presented at last year's "Symposium on Chaos Theory,
Quantum Physics, and the Body in Motion" at New York
University. This kind of simultaneity, and the fact that the
dancers in Amsterdam found Schwarz's model in accordance
with their own experiences, gave me hope that one or
both of us had stumbled onto an organization of ideas that
could spur useful dialogue in the improvising community.
In that spirit I would like to present my model of the
improvising mind. I will try to balance my cumbersome
reliance on the vocabulary and concepts of the "New Physics"
with some examples from my own awareness in moving
that provided a framework and direction for this work.
I will also attempt to draw parallels to the concepts and
terminology provided by Schwarz.
FUNCTION FOLLOWS FORM
In his description of the "holographic" brain, Schwarz
discusses the fact that a single holographic plate (or human
mind) can hold "hundreds of images" at the same time, and
that every part of a hologram "contains the whole image."
This is a more complex and multi-layered understanding of
brain function than existed in the past, and one that is now
shared across a number of scientific disciplines, including
my own areas of interest, chaos theory and quantum theory.1
For me, theory and dancing come together in the following
way. Sometimes, when I'm moving, I find my awareness
tracking the changing movement patterns more than
experiencing the movements themselves. While this might
sacrifice some of the immediacy of the dancing, it brings
into sharp focus the startling range and complexity of spontaneous
human creativity. Our minds seem to be capable,
on demand, of creating, recognizing, and breaking an infinite
number of patterns, anywhere on a spectrum from
strictly ordered to completely random.2 I believe (and, at
this stage of our understanding of the mind-body-brain
relationship, this is only speculation) that there is a structural
foundation for this skill.
Like many, or even most, objects in nature, the human
body, including the brain and neural system, contains some
linear and some non-linear (particularly fractal) structures.3
A fundamental tenet of my model of the improvising mind
is that this structural dualism, linearity and non-linearity
integrated into the same space, creates a corresponding
dualism of function: that at the same time in the same mind
we all have a propensity towards order and a propensity
towards chaos. The interaction of these opposing forces in
the mind can be elucidated by quantum theory.
Improvisation can be thought of as a continuous series
of minute creative acts, with each action arising from the
improviser's experience/physical structure and the conditions
created by the improvisational choices that precede it.
Quantum theory tells us that after each action there is a
moment, a place, a world where many choices for the next
movement simultaneously coexist. For example, if I was
leaning far off-center, about to fall, my next "decision" (this
is not necessarily a conscious decision) would be limited to
all of the ways that I could accomplish the fall (would I roll
through, rebound and reverse direction, allow my weight to
collapse? etc.). According to a quantum approach, the fact
that I eventually fall in only one way does not mean that
my mind is only presenting me with one choice. Instead,
my mind creates a potentially limitless number of simultaneous
"choices" (computer program-like sets of neural
instructions) that cover the spectrum from order to chaos.
In quantum theory, the term for this acceptable coexistence
of mutually exclusive possibilities is "a coherent superposition
of states."
I find this idea to be more than just a theoretical construct
because I have felt this effect in my body while dancing.
Sometimes, in the hyperawareness of improvisation,
there are microseconds of stillness between movements (a
feeling I might call "hovering") where I sense an actual
muscular tension that feels like my body wants to go in
several directions. An instant later this tension resolves
itself with a release into movement.

COLLAPSING THE WAVEFORM
The release into movement represents a "decision" by
the improvising mind. Although a full understanding of
such a decision will probably remain forever beyond our
grasp, there are approaches that can hint at the underlying
processes. Schwarz used the image of a "fractal hierarchy"
to explain "how the dancer passes from image to image
logically but unpredictably." The fractal idea is an apt one,
particularly the concept of bifurcation points4: the logic of
change stems from the acknowledgement that there is a
history, a path, an existing pattern that brought the mover
to this particular decision; the unpredictability arises from
the degree of possible bifurcation (how near or far from the
existing path will a new direction take us).
Quantum theory provides an even clearer view of logical
unpredictability. This approach states that we cannot
knew, for a single occurrence, which choice among the multitude
will become a "physical" reality, but we can gain some
understanding of the process by examining the probabilities
of that event occurring.
Picture, if you will, all of the possible choices hovering
in this superposed world awaiting a conscious/unconscious
signal of some kind, an impetus to action that requires a
resultant movement. Quantum theory would assign each
choice a quantum mechanical "weight," which is an expression
of the probability of a certain possibility occurring. If
you could somehow graph these probabilities, you would
create a visual representation known as a "waveform" or
"wave function." Each time a possibility manifests as movement
in the physical world, its probability becomes one
hundred percent, and the probability of all other choices
becomes zero. This is called "collapsing the waveform."
For an event where the choices are quite limited, this
approach can create a very clear picture of what might
happen. For a phenomenon as complex as movement improvisation,
a clear picture is not possible. But that does not
mean that this approach has nothing to offer. If we use one
aspect of improvisation, movement patterns, as an example,
we can see how the waveform, chaos/order, and the desires
of the mover begin to converge.
An experienced improviser is aware (to varying degrees)
of patterns created by his/her movements. These might be
patterns of effort, patterns in space, patterns of focus, or
many others. But one thing they all have in common is that
the next movement performed will represent either a continuation,
a variation, or a breaking of the pattern. If it is the
"desire" (whatever that may be) of the mover to continue
the pattern, the possibilities nearer to the order end of the
chaos/order spectrum will be more heavily weighted, more
likely to be physicalized. If variation or discontinuation is
desired, weightedness will reside nearer to chaos.
So this loading of the improvisational dice, this boosting
of particular curves in the waveform, is a reflection of a
certain kind of "desire" at the moment of decision. It could
be a completely conscious choice, or maybe an un-thought
awareness that change is needed, or maybe just inherent
patterns or "habits" of the mover. This is not at all clear.
What is clear is that the kinds of desires that bias creative
decision-making do not occur in an aesthetic vacuum. They
are a manifestation, a celebration, of who we are as individuals
and social beings. To understand this we must incorporate
one last element into this mind model: culture.

THE CULTURAL PATINA
At first glance, the role of culture in improvisational
creativity could seem overwhelming. Not only does it
shape the materials of art, in this case the movement choices,
but it plays an important role in concepts of form, and
even in the types of "desires" an artist has during creation.
In his description of what he calls "the cultural patina,"
Schwarz mentions "ethnic traditions" along with "gestures,
gaits, rites, and everyday routines." But despite the pervasiveness
of these cultural influences, individuality, originality/
is undeniable.
Certainly, a major reason for this originality is personal
history, which places each person within one or more cultures,
yet separates him/her from any other individual. But
I think there is more to it To explain my position, I would
like to shift the focus of the chaos/order spectrum slightly
by changing the names of each end to reflect more of the
effect of chaos and order. The effect of chaos on the creative
process would be "something completely different or unexpected"
to that which came before. The effect of order, as I
am conceiving it, would be something I term "cultural
coherence."
Cultural coherence is the result of using the materials
and rules of forming (the "grammar," if you will) accepted
and understood by a particular culture.5 If some form of
communication, some transfer of "meaning" (I am using this
in a very open-ended fashion) is desired, then the culture of
the intended receiver (even if it is yourself) must be consciously
or unconsciously taken into account. The most
obvious example is language, where an accepted set of
sounds (phonemes) makes individual units of meaning
(words) which can be combined in specific ways to make
larger units of meaning (phrases, sentences, etc). To change
or manipulate any of the elements of language is to risk
miscommunication. The same issues apply to any medium,
be it visual, aural, or kinesthetic.
I want to make it very clear, though, that cultural coherence
is not an end in itself. If everyone relied only on what
had been passed down to them in the process of acculturation,
then culture, and our means of communicating within
it, could never grow. If I, as an individual dance artist,
wish to successfully communicate something, I must either
limit my art to that which is common to everyone in my
audience, or I must use that commonality as a base from
which the viewers can be enticed or dragged into the range
of experiences unique to me and my work. That is why I
think cultural coherence must be constantly challenged;
stretched but not broken. Integrating elements of chaos into
the cultural equation can provide the necessary stretch.
The final version of this model of the improvising mind,
as shown in Diagram 2, necessitates a slight reconception of
existing ideas of creativity and originality. The ability to
make something new and different is apparently hard-wired
into all of us, so it can be seen as only a part of the creative
puzzle. The next step, which might be called "effective
originality," demands that we find some balance between
what is new and what is familiar, between chaos and cultural
coherence, so that we can open a passage between the life
of the dancer and the lives of others who experience the
dance.

SO WHAT?
It is easy to question the sense or necessity of developing
elaborate models to explain processes which exist and
continue quite oblivious to our intellectual gropings. Thinking
about these ideas might not change the way we move,
but moving with these ideas might just change the way we
think. I know that I set out on these thought journeys
seeking the same thing I search for in improvisation: connections.
We can see chaos all around us and then find it in
ourselves. We can recognize that the quantum processes
which control the atoms in the wooden floor on which we
stand, control the atoms in our own hands and feet. After
four centuries of pseudo-objectivity, science is finally trying
to help us find the through-line, playing a cosmic game of
"Where's Waldo?" to see where humans are hiding in our
picture of the universe.

----------------

STILL MOVING Confacf Improv. shop talk and dialogue

by Many


I am writing this letter first as an
announcement of an incident that occurred
at the 1993 Breitenbush Jam, in
Oregon, and second as a proposal in
response to that incident.
At the 1993 Breitenbush Jam, a
man who is a massage therapist by
trade and a contact improvisor, was
asked by the organizers to leave the
event. The decision by the organizers
came about because a woman participant
of the Jam announced that her
trust and body had been violated by
this man in an unwanted sexual manner
at the end of a massage.
Subsequently, at the 1993 A Cap-
pella Motion Workshop two women
came forward saying that similar incidents
had occurred to them with this
same man, during A Cappella Motion
of the previous summer. All three of
these women are filing formal complaints
with a National Grievance
Committee and the Health Department/
Massage Therapist Registry in the
state where this man operates a massage
school.
I propose that we need to remind
people at workshops and jams that we
are creating unique and temporary
communities for the duration of the
event. These gatherings generally
1
photo: Ka Rustler
support an environment for one’s
body/mind to open, learn, change and
dance with self and others. These
activities often engender a sense of
trust with fellow participants. The
reminder is that as unique and as nurturing
as the community may feel at
the time, we are still part of the real
world. One needs to maintain the defenses
of one’s personal safety that
one uses in the real world.
Perhaps “Still Moving” in CQ
could provide an arena for a discussion
of issues regarding appropriate
and inappropriate sexual behavior as it
interfaces with contact dancing. At
least I hope people will be more willing
to speak out on unwelcome incidents.
As several people said to me
after the Breitenbush event, “I’m surprised
it hasn’t happened before.”
Well, maybe it has.
Sincerely,
Karen Nelson
co-organizer
1993 Breitenbush Jam
We encourage dialogue on all sides of
the issues raised here, including how
we, as an ongoing community (comprised
of individuals and many temporary
communities), might resolve these
situations. [Eds.]

The Survivor
You come to movement class in a bulky sweatshirt
Irritable about beginning
To move through a labyrinth of distortions
To remove somebody else’s vision of how you need to be.
Your arms cross your chest when class discussion focuses
on choices
As class discussion always does
Free choice, frequent free choice,
Friendly, frequent, free, choice
You are overwhelmed by the possibilities of your liberty.
Unfettered by mother or father or competitive siblings
You hear me say, “I don’t know your family,’’
“/ only know you and I like you.”
You are simultaneously stunned and delighted.
As time goes on, I notice that you avoid lying on your back
on the floor
For relaxation, getting up, or visual imagery work
You rub your eyes or nose, fix your clothing,
Jiggle your leg or readjust your feet over and over and over.
Moments of encouraged rest following vigorous outlays of
energy
Allow you to be with yourself in a once crowded, shared
movement space
Just as memories force you to be with yourself in a once
crowded, shared,
moving space.
You resist knowing your movement preferences
You keep asking if this idea is alright.
I counter with, “What is your intent?”
What are you trying to say with your body?
You laugh nervously, your eyes averting mine
I wait silently for you to talk
Often it’s the first time someone has asked you a question
that really matters
To you, to your heart, to your mind, to your self.
Frequently, the tears come next
Your voice has been stilled for so long
Your vocal cords rasp with unknown sounds
Acknowledging what you have wanted to say for so long.
I am touched by this rare privilege of witnessing
The collision of your inner and outer environments
You have so much to say with your body
Sometimes it is easier than using words.
Your struggle begins with deeply held anger
Or syrupy, singing, sweetness
A resistance to the river’s flow
A plunge into the stream’s swollen current.
Your perception of yourself starts to shift
You attempt floppy movements once held back by a rigid spine
You release the back of your neck once poised for quick
reactions
You silently sink to the floor releasing long-held fears.
You experiment with newly-dredged feelings
Delighted at the dizziness of losing clutched muscular control
You leave the floor feverishly
Luxuriating in sensations, and appreciating the grip of gravity.
You explore twisted, convoluted ugliness
Using gravity now as steady ballast
You toy with falling off balance
Teetering on the edge of risk-taking solitide.
You tremble with near poised positions
Shuddering when moments of intensity
Implode upon the nervous system
Discharging sturdy, stifled, impulsive insights.
You run and leap and skip and walk, partaking of ritual
You clap and skip and giggle with radiant glee
You glide effortlessly near dusicy gloom
You prance a persnickety pattern around demanding
expectations.
Intermittent pulses flow counterpoint to sporadic accents
Energy vibrates in uncharted tissues
Time loses its predictable cadence
As you create personal, coveted space.
Your motifs ripple with stirring strength
Designs sink into logical symmetry and unidentified weight
Function follows form
The dance is somehow done but is actually just beginning.


by Martin Keogh
Once a year, Stanford University
in Palo Alto, California offers a course
titled, “Dance Heritage: History and
Styles.” For this course, a guest instructor
is invited to teach a dance form
that has had an impact on the history of
dance. Over the years these courses
have included the styles of Merce
Cunningham, Martha Graham, and
Isadora Duncan. When the department
first approached me, they said that they
were finally entering the twentieth
century and would like someone to
teach Contact Improvisation. Some of
the school’s instructors had been lobbying
for Contact Improvisation classes,
and because we were celebrating the
twentieth anniversary of the inception of
the form, they felt it qualified for the
“Heritage” component of this particular
course.
In my thirteen years of teaching, I
have been accustomed to students who
were somehow familiar with the form;
they had seen a performance, or had
danced with friends, or had taken contact
classes. When I entered the Roble
Dance Studio at Stanford, with a class
of 23 students, only five had heard of
the form and only three had ever seen
it. I had the unexpected realization that
I was in a position to be gently subversive.
Because of this unusual situation,
I taught a series that did not follow my
usual style and format. I kept the
students out of any continuous physical
contact for nine classes. It was like
extended foreplay. By the time they
started working in duets, they had built
a strong desire for the dance. Once the
class started dancing, that was all they
wanted to do in each of the afternoon
meetings.
At Stanford, students receive one
unit for dance classes, except in the
Dance Heritage series, where they are
awarded three units. For the extra units
they are expected to fulfill reading,
writing and dancing components of the
course. For this series a journal was
required. The dance critic Janice Ross,
who taught the historical content of the
course, wrote the following description
for the class syllabus:
The journal is an account of
your thoughts and responses to
Contact Improvisation, an artifact
of your on-going relationship
to this material. Be aware
how these ideas are affected by
class, readings, discussions.
The journal is also something of
the reverse: a record of the way
life imprints itself upon your
understanding of this project
through other performances, art
events, daily life. Feel free to
develop a written format that
suits you. Be honest. Have
serious fun. The completed
journal will constitute your
written final for the class.
It was a pleasure and an honor to
teach this group of receptive and articulate
students. Below are excerpts from
the students’ journals, chosen for their
untainted view, their insight, and some
for their poetry.
JOURNAL EXCERPTS:
How am I supposed to dance, when
my country [India] is being torn to
shreds? It is a live naked body, with
feet tied to the rack, genitalia tearing
slowly. I burn, am in pain, am Sadist,
and Masochist in one. Riots, Burnings,
My Parents, Friends In The Midst, My
Being torn as it stretches across Miles to
the other end of the earth. And yet I do
dance, rehearse, and I am proud of
myself.
I am particularly interested in the
surfaces which we are urged to find.
Bone, muscle=planes—I am building a
sort of heat-sensitive-geographic-map
image of the shapes created by the body
in motion. An arm is ultimately narrow
and stick-like, but at the right moment
with a person spiraling over it, its support
can be like a sweeping field.
I felt a kind of awareness I don’t
think I ever experienced before. It’s not
cerebral at all—it’s much more wholly
awake. It’s a daze and an intense
awareness at once.
The pleasure of touch between people,
when we usually can only touch in
highly formalized ways. To be able to
slide and slither and wend and wiggle,
skin to skin, weight to weight: a visceral,
unnameable pleasure. When I walk out
of the studio, my relaxed touch is limited
to those I am particularly close to; but
within, this touch is everywhere between
near strangers as well as close friends.
Learning about their personality from
how they use their touch in the dance.
And outside of the studio, those I know
from contact I feel so much more comfortable
with, feeling we know each
other in these nameless visceral ways.
I really like the moments in the
dance where my expectations fail: where
I expect to go “whoosh” and go “clunk”
instead; I’m not sure why these moments
are so appealing to me, but they are.
1 was holding someone my size in my
arms! As a woman, I find this new
found strength very exciting. I have a
strong dance background in ballet and I
did a lot of advanced partner work so
I’m used to being lifted. I still like, or
rather love to jump, fly, and spin, but
now I realize that I can return the favor!
I’m no longer intending this class to
be psychotherapy or anything, but I
came to studio in a foul mood—felt
physically unwell and was really quite
numb—depressingly so. Left class really
happy, in no frivolous way, but quietly
and profoundly.
It was interesting how do-able some
of this work is. In the lift where one
person cartwheels onto the other’s
shoulder, my partner and I spent about
three minutes just being scared. Then
finally we tried it and it was such a
relief. It was not only reasonable to do,
but fun.
The advanced stepping-stepping over
the other person in a continuous motion—smoothly
introducing weight so
that weight is moving horizontally rather
than coming down. Then a revelation:
fervently, madly I started dashing from
one prone individual to another stepping
on all of them. Suddenly, everyone
began running around and shifting between
being prone and stepped on and
the scene erupted into spontaneous pandemonium.
Martin put into my dance the image
of a moonless Sierra Night Sky at 10,000
feet. It’s a cold frosty evening. I have
spent many hours lying in my sleeping
bag staring at the canopy of stars, the
cold air rushing at my face, sometimes a
gentle breeze tos lowly caress the trees,
or the stark mountain crags of bare-
edged rock ridges. There’s a sense of
peace, mixed with a feeling of tension,
as if something is about to happen. Perhaps
a meteorite, or a satellite silently
moving between the constellations. The
stars seem so bright and clear by themselves.
That’s what I think of the image.
Risks heights fall crashing bumping
gliding fluttering it is so wonderful to be
young and invincible to be filled with the
power of song & feeling in awe of my
dream in awe of gravity.
Because of my general stress level I
seem to have an easier time with the
blatantly expressive stuff and a harder
time with the more subtle stuff.
Blame your partner—yes—this is
easy to do, and I’m guilty of it. It takes
a lot of energy and inquiry to work with
a person that I feel isn’t present—but it
is about the relationship with the person
you are with at that moment and how
each person comes to that dance at that
moment.
“Over:”
finished—it’s over
power—she’s over you
cycle—over and over and over again
let go—get over it
Do you, projected reader, have certain
words which, separate from the
things they signify, simply grate on your
ears, sound like an offense to the human
tongue?? One such word for me is
“luxuriate.” The concept is fine, great,
necessary, but God the sound of the
word bothers me. Two words which appeal
to me, unlike luxuriate, are “sultry”
and “mango.”

There are some people I like dancing
with more than others. Some l feel are
more attuned to exploring together, to
discovering what's new in each new
partnering. Others feel to me to desire
to cling to their own agenda, a more
demanding stance, more one-way, less
two-way. I care less about partners who
grab, who take my limbs and yank this
way or that, go here, go there, do this,
do that. I can see their intentions of
making this dance work; but I want to
work for both of us, to work of both of
us, to work out of both of us.
The gift of resistance—the dynamics
made possible by giving resistance to
someone else’s weight or energy (as
opposed to support). Both experiences
teach me a lot. Moments when action or
balanced stillness grows from the two
forces countering each other to create a
third direction are specially exciting
physically and meaningful to me metaphorically.
How can the leader tell the difference
between active/unconscious resistance
and physical limits of anatomy?
When should resistance be coaxed away,
when is resistance an absolute physical
limit (i.e. knees only bend one way),
when is resistance natural/unconscious
protection?
Tomorrow & tomorrow & tomorrow
is but another day for sorrow & joy &
pain & life & shame but today today is
the sun’s birthday and all the days too
as long as they are today today I will
raise my feet to the sky today I will fall
to the floor & today I will make my own
dream with the sunken treasure of my
own body this & that I will lift lift lift
out of lazy nothingness and find the
corners that even scare lovers
My heart is as
a thousand cranes
in flight...
each time I do
a cartwheel +

----------------

Reflections on Dancing while Pregnant

by Betsy Ellis Kempner

By coincidence, three of us who
are in the contact group in Burlington,
Vermont, are pregnant at the same time.
Being pregnant at the same time has
allowed us to share experiences and
learn about ourselves and each other in
new ways. As you can imagine, this
sort of “pregnancy presence” has also
had an impact on the entire group.
For me, contacting has evolved and
changed as I have moved through the
stages of pregnancy. At first I felt
protective and slow in my movement.
I was always tired and my dancing
showed my fatigue. Now in my 24th
week, I feel energetic and imagine
myself moving as I always have moved
when I wasn’t pregnant. This contradiction
of feeling as though it’s easier to
move, take weight, and roll over my
belly as it enlarges, not only surprised
me, but has required that I explain
myself to the people with whom I
dance. Since it’s difficult to have great
objectivity regarding one’s own inspiration
to move, I could only say that I
move my body in ways that feel good,
natural, and within my range. Sound
familiar?
I don’t think of myself as having a
handicap nor do I have a ferocious
desire to dance even though I’m pregnant!
In fact, with my last pregnancy,
I stopped contacting because I pulled a
ligament during a lift.
During this pregnancy, lifting hasn’t
been a problem for me. I believe I am
lifting differently than when I injured
myself during the last pregnancy. Now
I am lifting by slightly bending at the
waist and knees, and carrying my
partner on my back. I can also engage
in short lifts through space when I am
moving with the momentum of the other
person. I had injured myself in the last
pregnancy by “muscling” my partner up
into a lift and subsequently straining
uterine ligaments.
Besides lifting in specific ways, I’ve
also been conscientious about rolling
with the enlarged uterus and baby. I
have found that I do this in two ways,
depending on the situation. The first
way that I was able to allow myself to
take weight was to relax my abdominal
muscles and let the other person sink
into, and roll past, my body. I used
this same technique for rolling over
others. Sound familiar? The main
difference doing this while pregnant is
that you really have to trust yourself
that it’s OK and it won’t hurt the baby.
The second technique I found to roll
through moves with an enlarging uterus
is quite different from the first In fact,
it is the opposite! I tighten my abdominal
muscles on occasion when I’m
feeling I need to protect myself. I believe
this usually happens when I’m not
expecting the weight of my partner or
the baby is in a position that is uncomfortable
for me.
The problem I’ve encountered most
recently while contacting is that other
people are afraid of hurting the baby.
Nobody can prevent me from giving
weight, but it’s really difficult to reassure
people that it’s alright for them to
give their weight to me! Who is disabling
who? I believe the ultimate
resolve is to trust that whether a person
is pregnant or not pregnant, that each
person contacting is responsible for
themselves. Thus, we return to the idea
I first expressed—when pregnant I move
in “ways that feel good, natural, and
within my range.”
Aside from the physical joy of moving
while pregnant, I feel that contact
improvisation has helped me to bond
with the baby. One experience of recognizing
the baby in a new way was
when I was contacting and felt my
partner’s elbows. It occurred to me that
it was very much like the feeling of the
baby moving inside of me. Somehow
making this connection—“oh, that’s
what the baby is doing”—helped me to
feel closer to the baby.
Bonding to the baby and adjusting
to one’s own body image while pregnant
can also be very humorous. My
friend Jayne is pregnant and we had the
funniest contact dance—a playful improvisation
about playing basketball with
our bellies. Others in the group were
having fun with this image too, providing
basketball hoops with their arms for
us to jump into! Dancing while pregnant
can be fun for everyone.
In conclusion, I would like to encourage
women who are pregnant to
keep dancing. There is so much to be
gained from this experience. It may
seem awkward at times and movement
may feel slow and lethargic too, but you
will learn to move in ways that are new
and right for your own changing body.
It is a time of change and exploration
for everyone in your dance group.
Contacters who dance with pregnant
women are also learning to move in
different ways.
What is there to gain by contacting
while pregnant? The pregnant woman
doing contact gains freedom to explore
and expand movement options at a time
when most pregnant women limit and
decrease movement options. By expanding
movement options, the pregnant
woman is likely to have fewer backaches
and swelling. Greater comfort in
pregnancy occurs by exercising muscles
which support the back and uterus and
by increasing blood circulation.
The psychological benefits of contacting
while pregnant include enhanced
self/body image, increased bonding time
with the baby, and continued socialization
during pregnancy. It also enhances
greater understanding about pregnancy
by those in the group who have never
been pregnant ★

----------------------

Editor Note COMING TO MEET THE OTHER

The sun was setting; it was getting late.
He walked her to the garden gate.
He wanted to thank her, but he didn’t know how.
’Cause he was the farmer, and she was the cow.
6th grade autograph book inscription
“Opposition is true friendship.”
William Blake

It was by chance that I happened to see Israel’s Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin and P.L.O. Chairman Yassir Arafat
shake hands on the White House lawn last September. I
was stopping home midday and flicked the tv on for a
quick weather report and found, instead, the ceremony
about to begin. I stood, then sat, spellbound, watching
their movements: every shift of weight, turn of head,
direction of gaze, the reach, hesitation, grasp, shaking it,
the hand, firmly, finally, and letting it go. When the ceremony
was over, I cried, feeling slightly embarrassed,
slightly proud, and surprised at the force of my reaction.
I think what moved me most was the movement and
how it spoke of what was inside it. As much as the teams
of experts tried to choreograph this handshake—having
Clinton step back and open his arms, leaving the space in
front of him empty, a powerful vacuum into which the
magic handshake might (be made to) suddenly appear—it
wasn’t going to be that easy. Though diplomats, skilled in
the art of shake and smile, these two men were, for a long
moment, much more than political symbols, and their
movements couldn’t hide the enormous personal investment,
the hope, reservation, courage, pride, fear and discipline
that brought them all the way to the touch of each
other’s hands.
When I went into the studio up in Vermont last year for
a ‘visit’ with my friend Simone Forti, a dancer whose work
I respect and enjoy, I wasn’t sure what would happen. All
I knew was what I had asked for: that the two of us be in
the space together, working alone on whatever was most
compelling for us at the time, and that we wouldn’t, unless
irresistibly drawn to it, interact with each other directly.
I began moving as I had been for some months, slowly,
deeply, on the floor, finding my way through a satisfying
terrain of micro-stretches and weight releases, full of feeling,
sensation and image—private, personal—when I began
to hear Simone warming up. She was light on her feet,
moving this way and that, sometimes going to the floor,
then hopping up, talking in a high animated voice: “Yes,
yes, I really did like that book... It really is a good book,”
etc. As she continued her work, I began to feel increasingly
uncomfortable, irritated, bothered. I can’t relate to this,
I thought to myself. I don’t want to relate to this. And
then I realized I didn’t exactly have to. I had made the
rules and the rules said to stay with what I was doing, not
worry about meeting or trying to adapt to the other. The
point was not to try to block out her presence, but to accept
and appreciate it while continuing on my own way. This
makes its own kind of relationship. After twenty years of
meeting partners through Contact Improvisation, I find this
kind of meeting extraordinary, a tremendous relief and a
demanding discipline.

So I continued, aware and not aware of Simone’s
whereabouts, following the thread of my sensation further
through the maze of images that it provoked. An hour or
so later, I noticed that we were very close to each other in
the room, she still on her feet dancing and talking, me
moving slowly on the floor. At that moment I experienced
us in the same image—she as a dehydrated woman dancing
lightly through the desert telling her tale, and I, below, was
the desert under her feet—geologically slow, compressed
layers of time and earth, moving imperceptibly out in all
directions, going nowhere. I had arrived at our meeting.
Perhaps what really moved me in the Rabin-Arafat
handshake was realizing that their extreme differences
would not be dissolved by the touch of their hands. That
they would remain fiercely opposed and at the same time
deeply united. I hope to support this stance in my own
work and life within the dance community. How can we
share in the creation and development of work—the collective
work and the particular works; how do we, as individuals,
stand alone with our experience, and how do we shift
in and out of synch with our peers without losing contact?
How can we respect the integrity of the individual’s contribution
and at the same time share freely in the collective
bounty of the work?


by Nancy Stark Smith

----------------------


IN REMEMBRANCE OF ARTHUR ARMIJO
by David Dorfman

 (1960-1993)

It's cold here in Minneapolis on the last day of January
1994. It's warm in the whirlpool at the Best Western where I
have visions of Arthur gracing the over-chlorinated air and
water with his playful strut and acrobatics back in May of
1987. I was dancing with Arthur that week as a member of
Susan Marshall and Co. In one dance, Trio in Four Parts, we
were buddies, both restless, Arthur the leader, I the loyal side-
kick. Five years before, Susan, Arthur and I had met at the
The Yard, on Martha's Vineyard, and our lives were profoundly
changed forever. Now almost seven years after the first
Minneapolis trip, I've returned to the Best Western after
having completed performances in collaboration with my dear
friend Dan Froot, creations that speak of two men mourning
the loss of loved ones, that cry out at the unjust God-like
authorities at large, and that hopefully give us and others the
strength to go on without those loved ones.
And go on we do, but it's a difficult task. I write this now
to celebrate the life of Arthur Armijo, one of the most gifted
dancers of our generation and one of my most inspiring
friends.
Arthur Armijo was bom on July 13, 1960 in New Mexico
and died August 8, 1993 in New York City with his family
and members of Susan Marshall and Co. at his side. In the
brief 33 years between these events, Arthur exuded potent
doses of quiet charisma, wonderfully mischievous abandon,
unparalleled poetic beauty on stage, and a humor and
unlimited wisdom and generosity as a friend such that most
of us will continue to measure our world by him I will miss
his wondrous touch on the back of my neck, and the sound of
his large-scale snoring on tour in our hotel room as he would
drift into sleep. Just this week I saw him: diving crazily into
the pool; in a play, acting and dancing the lead role; and as I
stared into the mirror attempting a paltry imitation of him
moving his long, uncannily flexible arms, as only Arthur
could.
The day after Arthur died, I traveled to Jacob's Pillow in
Massachusetts to collaborate with another Yard friend, Victoria
Marks, on a project to be shown on the Pillow's Inside/Out
stage. Each night that Victoria and I spoke with those who
came to see our in-process creation, I told the story of returning
home from the hospital the night Arthur died, not being
able to imagine how I would sleep that night, arise the next
day, drive to an idyllic setting and begin a piece of art. Then,
day after day, with the help of Victoria and the talented
performers with whom we worked, we all began to find ways
of expressing our sorrow and our joy, combining these two
emotions to assert Arthur and ourselves in the world.
Arthur continues to grace our lives in many ways. As I
was driving downtown in Manhattan, after a dinner with
Arthur's family the night before his memorial tribute in
December, I tuned into a radio interview with director Wim
Wenders. Wenders's film, Wings of Desire, was one of Arthur's
favorites and one that had influenced Arthur's own choreography.
The interviewer asked Wenders why he felt a need to
make a sequel to Wings of Desire. He replied that the world
was different now. The Wall had come down, people had
changed, his angels had changed—there was even a new
angel, a woman. The interview caused me to realize how
drastically our world had changed on August 8,1993, and that
there is yet another very special angel looking over us all.
Thank you, Arthur.


----------------------

OUT IN THE FIELD an invitation to the Urban Nature project

by Jaap Klevering

The Urban Nature project is, in
essence, research about the relationship
of humankind-in-the-’90s to our immediate
environment. The research is of
an experiential nature. Through physical
and spiritual experience, participants
of the project discover possible ways of
behavior in different environments.
Although my partner Jaana Turunen
and I have worked (and lived) for many
years in rural areas, it wasn’t until 1991
that I figured how interesting it could be
to subject the ‘laws of nature’ to the
‘laws of the city’. What happens when
my senses are as alert, my reflexes as
reactive and my state of mind as open
and direct in the noise of an urban
situation as they are in the nature?
Between the summers of ’91 and
’92, I collected three dancers besides
Jaana and myself, two musicians, one
visual artist, one writer, one photographer
and a small television crew. We
worked for four weeks, as the ‘urban
nature tribe’ at the beautiful location of
a former shamanic ritual offering site in
Finnish Lapland. There is a small lake,
set in low mountains with a thirty-meter
waterfall.
The main aim of this project was to
find out what would happen to us and
our reactions in an urban environment
after we’d been for four weeks in those
mountains in the nature with our senses
alert and open. The resulting 1992
performances took place at the Zoo of
Korkeasaari, in Helsinki, Finland. The
performance space was in the outside
cage of a just renovated monkey house.
Before us, there was first a lion, then an
ice bear, then us and now baboons live
there.
Research environments are always
natural. Believing that true life-force is
rooted in and created from the organic
earth, it is necessary for the continuation
of creative development to understand
and redefine our connections to the
wilderness within ourselves. This
involves a process of sensing, relating,
exploring and finally through form and
structure, experiencing the workings of
intelligence.
We are looking for collaborators
now on the Urban Nature project.
Participants can be: dancers, physical-
oriented actors, visual artists, musicians,
writers, thinkers, technicians, architects.
Not necessarily all of these will participate
at the same time nor all of the
time. Natural environments we might
explore can be: dry hot deserts, arctic
ice, desolate nordic border areas (Lap-
land); hot jungles, high mountains, sea
shores, lake districts, etc.
The information will be collected in
a natural environment, mainly in an
instinctive and sensory way. Exploration
of the information will happen in
both natural and ‘artificial’ environments;
the process of exploration is
physical, sensory, emotional, informal,
and ritualistic. The final performance
will be a manifestation of an integration
of the previous experiences within a
conceptualized frame. The performing
environment will be at least partly arti- ,
ficial. Performances can be done at:
tunnels, factory halls, in mine-shafts,
dead end streets, etc.
The next Urban Nature projects i
possibly will happen in Austria, summer
1994, and New Mexico, summer 1995.
If you are interested to know more
about this work, or would like to participate,
or if you know of interesting
locations, please call or write me. The
Urban Nature project is a moving situation
and I’d like to keep it that way.

----------------------

JOHN ROLLAND REMEMBERED
by Nancy Topf

JOHN ROLLAND, 43, died on
December 16,1993 in Amsterdam. He
was an important figure in the development
of Release and Alignment Technique,
an exploration which he and I
sltared for twenty-five years. This technique
included ideokinesis (mind/body
integration), the use of hands-on bodywork
and improvisation in teaching
dance. This is my testimony and tribute
to John's life and work.
I met John in 1968 when he
was a student at the University of Illinois.
John was in a class in which I
was teaching dance through the Cunningham
technique, with a traditional
method of training where students
imitate the actions and shapes of the
teacher. During a class early in the
term, John was wiggling his head on
his spine, a movement that made him
stand out from the other students since
the class usually began in stillness with
the body standing erect and feet in
parallel position. I asked John what he
was doing and he replied, 'I'm feeling
my head balancing on my spine." Witnessing
his movement, and hearing his
use of the word "feeling" combined
with the anatomical language, created
a pivotal moment in my direction as a
teacher.
For several years before this time,
Marsha Paludan and Joan Skinner had
been exploring these concepts as teachers
at the University. Neither Joan nor
Marsha were at the University the year
I arrived, but John conveyed his excitement
about this work to me and we
began an intense ongoing dialogue
exploring these concepts and questioning
traditional methods of training the
been involved with this work at the
University, impacted greatly on these
early explorations.
Subsequently, but at different
times, John, Marsha, Mary and I became
students of Barbara Clark, who
had herself been a student of Mabel
Todd, author of The Thinking Body.1 It
was Barbara's work that helped to define
a theoretical and technical foundation
for much of our own research.
In 1972 I joined John and Marsha
for the summer in Lawrence, Kansas.
(John had already spent the two previous
summers in Lawrence, which was
Marsha's home.) I read The Thinking
Body for the first time. Marsha was
doing creative work with children,
inspired by her work with Barbara
Clark. We joined her in these projects
and also spent time in a studio where
we laid on the floor, yawned, crept,
crawled and explored the developmental
path.
Back in New York, I continued
exploring this movement with my
students at Lehman College, although
the physical education administration
preferred more traditional methods.
During this period Mary was based at
the University of Rochester where she
was developing her work and had
invited John to join her there.
In 1973, Mary moved to England
and continued developing the release
work at Dartington College in Devon.
John, Marsha, and myself were often
invited as guest teachers.
In 1976, Marsha, John and I established
a workshop that became known
as the Vermont Movement Workshop,
which lasted for twelve years. The
purpose of the workshop was to provide
an environment that would give
us freedom to further develop these
pedagogical explorations and to intensify
our dialogue. We established a
curriculum that included Todd alignment
work, release technique, contact
improvisation, and a composition class
called "Structures for Improvisation."
Each summer we invited additional
faculty to share in the teaching. There
were few places at that time for such
experimental work with students.
During this period, "release" referred
to an ideokinetic (mind/body)
method of movement training in which
anatomical images from the alignment
work we had been developing were
explored in movement improvisations
through a deep meditative process.
Anatomical images are pictures of
the skeleton combined with lines of
direction that instruct the body towards
its most efficient use in relation
to gravity, weight and momentum. [See
inset from John's book, Inside Motion.]
The developmental movement path
(rolling, crawling, rising/falling, standing,
walking, i.e., the path the baby
takes to become vertical) was used as
the basic structure from which the
improvisations developed. The images
not only heightened anatomical and
alignment awareness in the student,
but also inspired the creation of dances.
The anatomical images would
transform into personal 'landscapes'
but always could be traced back to an
anatomical source.
John taught the alignment class and
shared the teaching of the release classes
with Marsha and myself. In teaching,
John conveyed his clear and precise
understanding of the body. His
class was technically sound and beautifully
organized, and my body easily
internalized the information. John was
a very gifted and inspiring teacher! He
knew how things were put together; he
understood structure; and the progression
of his classes was extremely logical.
In contrast to my earlier teaching
methods related to the Cunningham
technique, "release" technique provided
students with the means to find their
own form, action and direction, motivated
and rooted in the experience and
knowledge gained from the anatomical
images. This experience emphasized
an awareness of the skeletal structure.
In 1981 John was invited to become
a member of the teaching staff at the
Modem Dance Department of the State
Theaterschool in Amsterdam.2 The
school administrators were delighted
with John's innovative method of
teaching that freed dance training from
stylistic limitations yet still conveyed
basic technical knowledge. John
brought this new educational model to
the Theaterschool, an exciting and
supportive place for this movement
research and one of the few institutions
in the world that sponsored this pioneering
work. This was due to the
foundation laid by Pauline de Groot
and nourished by the intense interest of
Aat Hougee and Jaap Flier.
They also encouraged John during
the writing of his book Inside Motion.3
John has said that writing this book
was the most difficult thing he had
ever done. It describes the "essential
anatomical principles" (outlined in
Mabel Todd's work) in a manner that is
understandable and easy to apply.
John's drawings clearly illustrate these
essential ideas. It is an excellent workbook.
John wanted to share his beloved
Amsterdam with Marsha and I and he
encouraged the school to invite us as
guest teachers. I became a regular
guest teacher and had the opportunity
to witness John in the prime of his
teaching.
John's creative ability and his capacity
for analyzing and understanding
interior structure manifested in many
other aspects of his life. Teacher, dancer,
choreographer, and writer, John was
also a clothes designer, builder, furniture
maker and interior designer.
Among the many things John created
was a dress for me to make it easier to
nurse my baby. The dress had red and
blue flowers and a lace-trimmed zipper
in the front. Also a potter, John's early
pots looked like spines.
John's mother and father were both
highly regarded musicians and teachers.
John, himself, was an accomplished
pianist. When he finally
bought a piano for his flat in Amsterdam,
it was his way of saying that
Amsterdam would be his home. While
it was initially difficult for him to give
up his native culture, John uncovered
strong European roots and often travelled
to Budapest to visit relatives. He
loved Bartok.
John was a gifted visual artist and
a fantastic cook. If he saw a food bargain
in the market he would buy
enough for the Russian army and use
it to invent new variations of traditional
dishes. These concoctions were always
delicious and healthy. John loved
having dinner parties and always took
great care of his friends. He shared his
love of cooking with Raoul Anderson
and Lene Gravesen, the cooks at the
school. In fact, for the memorial service,
they prepared a feast of all of
John's favorite dishes.
John lived the last six and a half
years knowing that he was HIV positive
with the support of his loving and
devoted partner Ron Veeninga. They
shared a mutual interest and talent as
painters. They also shared daily bike
rides in the Vondelpark.
John became very involved in
learning about AIDS. Ron has said
that John learned so much about AIDS
that sometimes in the hospital the
doctors would ask him questions. He
became very involved in his own emotional
development through work with
an AIDS organization and began to
speak of the importance of emotional
work in the training of the dancer.
Through teaching guest workshops, he
shared these new-found tools with
students at the Theaterschool.
In closing, I would like to share a
poem by Marianne Moore that I saw
on the inside of a New York subway
car. The poem caught my attention
while I was on my way to pick up my
ticket to Amsterdam John was very ill
and I was struggling with the realization
that this would be the last time I
would see him
WHAT ARE YEARS?
What is our innocence,
what is our guUt? All are
naked, none are safe. And whence
is courage: the unanswered question,
the resolute doubt,—
dumbly calling, deeply listening—that
in misfortune, even death,
encourages others
and in its defeat, stirs
the soul to be strong? He
sees deep and is glad, who
accedes to mortality
and in his imprisonment rises
upon himself as
the sea in a chasm, struggling to be
free and unable to be
in its surrendering
finds its continuing.
So he who strongly feels,
behaves. The very bird,
grown taller as he sings, steels
his form straight up. Though he is captive,
his mighty singing
says, satisfaction is a lowly
thing, how pure a thing is joy.
This is mortality,
this is eternity.
Marianne Moore
John will always remain with me. I
speak of him and his brilliant, clear
work whenever I teach. I am grateful
for having experienced his incredibly
creative and inspiring life, his wisdom
and his friendship. I hope through
continuing our work I can honor his
life, express my devotion and celebrate
his memory. 

----------------------

MAKING A MEANINGFUL MEMORIAL

by Ron Veeninga

About eight months before John Rolland, my friend
and partner in life, died I watched an interesting program
on Dutch television called, "Artists and Death." It showed
how different artists were dealing with dying and death, a
subject that I had become quite interested in as both John
and I knew that one day he would die due to the incurable
disease he suffered from.
In spite of the fact that I'd lost many loved ones before, I
didn't really know about death. I was somehow kept away
from it as a child by my parents, and later on in life, people
that were close to me died in faraway places.
John and I had talked about his death quite often, and it
felt okay, meaning that for the first time in my life I was
able to give it a special place in my mind. I understood that
it didn't have to be negative or scary.
The only thing that didn't make sense to me was that
funerals and cremations all looked alike, no matter how
different the people were while they were still alive. Seeing
"Artists and Death," I learned that I wasn't the only one
who was thinking this way. The program showed that
slowly, slowly, people are becoming aware of their need to
do things "not the average way" when they die.
There was a painter on the program who said that she
didn't want to lie down in a casket that "did not belong to
her," so she decided to have one made, and painted it the
way she liked. When it was finished, she stored it away
and sometimes looked at it, knowing that it was alright
now. It gave her a good feeling to know that shen she died,
she would end up in a casket that she felt connected to.
The program gave me strength. I decided too that when
John would die, I would do the utmost to make his funeral
as personal as possible. I felt the need to be involved one
hundred percent, and didn't like the idea of strangers making
choices for us.
I actually got very excited about it, and told John about
the idea. His answer was, "You do whatever you think is
good. What's good to you is good to me." After every
dance performance we had seen together, we would spend
hours discussing how it affected us, its strengths and weaknesses,
especially in its structure and use of time, and how
that supported feeling. So he could be confident that whatever
I choreographed for his funeral would reflect his values.
There was a funeral director on the tv program who
explained that people could decide a lot more for themselves
but they simply didn't know that because most funeral
directors don't want to be bothered with this approach.
After all, it's big business. The more organized glitter, the
more money they make. So why tell people about other
possibilities?

I decided to get in touch with this funeral director, Ina
de Pauw, and invite her to our house, and I drew up a plan.
This was about seven weeks before John's death. I somehow
felt the time had come to start organizing it all, despite
John's telling me that he knew he was going to die during
the spring, still months away.
Ina appeared to be a very nice, straightforward woman
who knew her business. She asked me what the funeral
should be like, and I told her that we wanted it to be simple
but personal. She let me explain what I thought was simple,
and I was surprised by her response that my wishes were
rather unusual. Ina wrote everything down and then at the
end said it was going to be just beautiful.
Opening a catalog showing different shaped caskets, Ina
asked me to make a choice. In fact I didn't like any of
them, although the cheapest one was not offensive. I ran to
the bedroom (John was already so ill that he stayed in bed
most of the time) and showed him He said, "It's fine. At
least it7s simple!" I asked him that night if it bothered him,
confronting him with his own funeral like this. Again he
reassured me that everything I decided felt good to him.
His death was not a shadow of gloom to hide from, but a
part of life, a reality that we could deal with creatively. We
always had this understanding together. So visualizing the
ceremony became a source of creative satisfaction for him
during his last painful weeks. For example, when I proposed
a section in which everyone would place a candle on
the coffin, he would excitedly describe the scene to close
friends who came to visit.

I had the strong feeling that people should be given time
during the ceremony to go through emotions. I suggested
we rent the crematorium for a full hour instead of the standard
half hour. (Many cremation ceremonies, I learned, last
only 17 minutes!) Also, I had been to cremations and funerals
where the casket stayed in plain view, rather than descending
through the floor, to spare people the emotional
scene of witnessing the final departure. Why be afraid of
powerful feelings? We should all get up from our seats and
participate in that moment, hold hands in a circle around
the casket as it lowers. John agreed with me absolutely.
When that moment finally came, weeks later, it gave us all a
powerful, living image of ourselves as a community embrac
ing the life and death of one we all loved; that death need
not be an occasion to feel the breaking of bonds, but the
strengthening of them
One day I called Ina and told her that the casket had to
be dark cobalt blue, with black handles. I told John about it
and he asked me to show him the color-chart. "Oh," he
said, "that's a nice color!" That same night he asked
Jacques van Eijden, who was visiting us, to show him the
chart again. He double checked it and again gave his assent.
None of us could have known that John would die the
next morning. It was Thursday, the 16th of December, 1993
at 10:10 in the morning.
The day of John's cremation and memorial service was
the 21st of December. It had been raining all week long, bu!
on the 21st it was nice weather and there was even some
sunshine.
People entered the crematorium while piano music by
Rachmaninov (Prdudes, Op. 32, Nrs. 5-13) was being played
by Vladimir Ashkenazy. The funeral director, Ina, then
gave an introduction, followed by a speech by one of John's
friends, and a beautiful poem by Jacques van Eijden.
Because one of John's dearest friends, Nancy Topf, had
come all the way from New York to be with us, I chose a
piece composed by her husband, Jon Gibson, to be heard
during the candle ceremony. It was Extensions II, a piece
John liked very much. Everyone lit a candle, placing it
either on the casket, or next to it. After this, Ria Higler, one
of the directors of the School for New Dance Development
where John had taught for many years, spoke, explaining
how much John had meant to her and to the school.
After Ria spoke, we listened to a tape of John playing
three Bartok piano pieces, Mikrokosmos #138. It was very
emotional. John was a very talented pianist, and both his
parents were professional musicians. I loved his piano play
ing, and often begged him to play those three Bartok pieces
for me. He performed them with a superb sense of rhythm
and so authentically, perhaps because of his own Hungarian
background.
Then it was my turn to speak. I wanted to let people
know that in a short time John and I had lived a very full
life together. We both felt that we were not going to give
in, but fight to the very end. We were determined to live
happily, no matter what the future would bring us. A
person who can live such a long time knowing that there is
no cure for his disease, yet nevertheless maintain such a
positive outlook on life, is a true hero.
When it was time to say good-bye to him, a beautifully
moving Kaddish was played, sung by Ofra Haza, one of our
favorite Israeli singers, while we held hands around John's
5 cobalt blue casket covered with our flickering candles. As
the casket slowly descended to the song, a current of emotion
passed through the circle, shaking us with trembling
and quiet tears. It was hard to believe that the ceremony
was over now. People were reluctant to leave, watching the
empty space where moments before had been John's material
presence.
i Eventually people moved away from the hall while a
nocturne by John Field played. This was the last piece of
music John had been able to play on his piano before his
legs refused to cooperate.
John had one strong wish concerning his funeral. He
told me several times that he wanted a memorial service at
the dance school, to be held in Studio 3.1, which had originally
been a chapel at the top of the building. He also
mentioned that there should be a lot of good food, and an
opportunity for everyone who wanted to, to say something.
Good friends of John's, Raoul Anderson and Lene Graveson,
prepared it all: humus, "Gehakte Leber" (chicken liver pate),
falafel, and many other tasty things they knew John liked to
eat.
The cremation-funeral was held between 11:30 am and
12:30 pm. The gathering at the school started at 1:30. As
people entered with piano music playing, they were invited
to start eating and drinking. An hour later, we began a
special ceremony.
John and I had participated in a couple of AIDS workshops.
These workshops—titled, "Homecoming: Living and
Letting Go with HIV and AIDS"—use insights from Elisabeth
Kubler-Ross, and a Gestalt technique further developed
by Rochelle Griffin, who gives these workshops in Holland.
One of the ceremonies she led at the end of a five-day
workshop was to pick a flower from a big bouquet and say
what you "left" at the workshop, and what you "take home
with you." I had talked with Rochelle about using this
flower ritual for John's memorial service, giving people a
structure through which to express their feelings. There was
a big bunch of red and dark blue anemones, one of John's
favorite flowers. It was one of the most meaningful ceremonies
I've ever witnessed. John was remembered in so many
different ways. There was so much love and warmth
around.
At the very end we played a piece of music that John
always liked very much. It's an Israeli song, called "Hallelujah."
Everyone spontaneously joined hands in a circle
and danced and sang along. After the song, we raised a
toast to life, "L'chaim." John would have liked that.
On the 10th of January we buried John's ashes in our
communal grave at Zorgvlied Cemetary, along the Amstel
River in Amsterdam.
John had started out as a painter and ceramicist before
becoming a dancer. Years later, when John decided to paint
again, I realized I had never met anyone whose work so
closely connected to my own. Now that John is gone, looking
at the paintings, ceramics, self-made furniture, woolen
sweaters, clothes, etc. he made and left to me, I feel that not
only have I lost the most beautiful man I've known in my
life, but also the most talented, my favorite art soul-mate.
I'll miss discussing my paintings with him, but as he once
told me, "I'll always be there, looking over your shoulder,
and support you whenever I can."
John, to me you are and were the most beautiful man in
the world.

----------------------

poems 

by Marsha Paludan, Christina Svane, Jacques van Eijden

I wrote this poem in the early fall as I
returned from a walk in the woods.
The poem was for John and I sent it to
him a month before he danced away.
John, you are with me still laughing and
dancing.
Oldest friend, you were first my student
but you have taught me more these past six
and one half years how to live in the face of
death with child-like joy.
You have taught me how to live and
how to die with an open heart full of wonder
and creative fire.
You are with me still John and always.
Dying tree
Even in death
I see your smile
Against the sunrise sky

Marsha Paludan

At the end of John’s special memorial day,
some of us felt that we’d been a part of one
of John’s choreographies, his last, a
farewell, a wonderfully structured open
space in time. Time for us to be with our
feelings for him. This is the poem that I
read at the cremation.
John died.
His soul no longer in his body;
a body we'll carry
back to elements
out of which it was created.
His soul in our bodies;
in the way we live on
a gesture, a thought
the way we carry head and heart.
Until we hand over our soul
only then, being able
to really see John again.

Jacques van Eijden


n,
Dear John,
I suddenly see you
asking me to be your assistant
at Naropa in the summer of 78
when my heart, as sometimes happens,
was falling off a cliff.
“But I can’t teach your work,” I said,
7 don't know enough.”
“You have something else, you know,
a special way with people.”
Over and over in my life
you pointed to things I couldn’t see,
reasons to value myself.
Years later you held a luncheon at school
to announce your disease
and share a moving confession:
that all the years you’d taught you’d believed
your job was to pass on information.
And now you saw that a teacher’s true work
was to open the eyes of their students
to what is worth loving in themselves.
I suddenly see this as the secret
shared by all great artists,
still the hardest taboo to break,
the slipperiest key to hold onto,
the one that unlocks the prison gate.
When you would insist on praising me
for my dancing, saying it moved you deeply,
I suddenly see you were teaching me, like a mother,
to grow up and take responsibility.
“Your problem is that you don’t believe in yourself.
What are you going to do about it? There are ways
to work through it, you know. You have to do some researt
contact the source of the feeling, and it will begin to move,
transform and finally change from fear and doubt to love.
This you can count on: when set in motion,
one arrives at love, like every river finds the ocean.
It is a profound dance.”
These teachings stay with me;
I gather my courage to use them.
I suddenly see that you were not just my dear friend,
but a life-teacher of a high order:
sharply honest, persistent and interested
far beyond friendship would require.
Through all your pain, you turned
every conversation we had to me and my dilemmas.
Through all your need, you asked me for nothing,
but gave me your undying support.
The quality of the love you gave me, like your being,
was unyielding, bright and pure as a diamond.
I will try to wear it, John,
where it can be seen.

----------------------

RETHINKING WORDS a field trip to dance criticism

by Andre Lepecki

The field
In the late spring of 1993, 1 was a guest “Theory”
teacher at the European Dance Development Center
(EDDC) in Arnhem, Holland.
“Theory” being too broad a concept to serve as a
guideline, I decided to organize the three weeks of the
workshop as a shared exploration with the students of
several perspectives on how we could approach dance that
is being made today. My concern was to give the EDDC
dance students some basic concepts from the fields of cultural
anthropology, semiotics and psychoanalysis and to try
to use those models to help us talk, write, and understand
the aesthetics and politics of contemporary dance.1
One of my unstated objectives throughout the course
was to try to avoid what seems to me a strange paradox
pervading dance theory. For some reason, and with some
rare and noble exceptions,2 there is a strange discomfort
amongst academia in dealing with dance outside the frame
of historical perspective and a reluctance to look for a
more complex interpretive frame that can illuminate contemporary
choreography. Whether this predominance of
History in dance research comes from an attempt to dignify
an art form by acknowledging its aging (always a respectable
predicament, the one of being old) or from the enormous
theoretical difficulties that semiotics and other disciplines
have in dealing with non-textual art forms, the result
is nevertheless a strange paradox—an art that needs living
bodies to exist is projected, as a research object, to an
intangible past. It is as if we needed the veil of death in
order to face the essence of dance. (Or is this veil a symptom
that something unbearable may lie at the core of
dance?)
With all this in mind, the students and I dealt basically
with two major thematic areas: firstly, an introduction to
general concepts and methods coming from the Anthropology
of the Symbolic and their possible applications to a
decoding of choreographic construction; and secondly, a
broad discussion on the politics surrounding the issues of
dance creation and the circulation of dance in the market
Here a special focus was put on the role of journalistic
dance criticism as an essential part of that market
I wanted the students to understand that if we are to see
dance as a cultural object not only do we have to acknowledge
and study the work of choreographers, dancers, composers,
designers and all the artistic staff that put then-
creativity together to make a choreographic object, but also
and necessarily we must include in our analysis those indispensable
counterparts of the creative process in a capitalistic
system of production, the entire web that lives for
and because of Dance: critics, journalists, curators and producers.
My point was to bring some awareness to how this
broad community functions in a dynamic way continuously
shaping and reshaping (consciously and/or unconsciously)
the definitions of what dance is or should be. This constant
reshaping of aesthetic values plays an essential part in
the construction of desire, frustration and validation that
keep the dance market running.
A salad of references
What I wanted to bring to the EDDC workshop was a
political and critical approach to the issues and practices
surrounding the making, producing and writing of dance—
particularly, and this is important, of journalistic writing of
dance. I wanted to transmit to the students the critical
tradition typical of my field of knowledge—Cultural Anthropology.
The main reference I brought to the workshop was the
iconoclastic precepts of a discipline known broadly as
“Critical Theory.” Dwight Conquergood, from the Department
of Performance Studies at Northwestern University,
although acknowledging the lack of a unitary concept for
the field of Critical Theory, defines it as being “.. .committed
to unveiling the political stakes that anchor cultural
practices—research and scholarly practices no less than
the everyday" and concludes “Yes, critical theory politicizes
science and knowledge."3 My inclusion of aesthetics
and criticism in this process of politicization is only a
logical extension of Conquergood’s definition: “Critical
theorists.. .are committed to the excavation of the political
underpinnings of all modes of representation, including the
scientific.”4
Into this excavation and politicization, I tossed an inter-
textual salad of three critics of criticism in the three disciplines
of Performance Studies, Ethnography, and Dance
Theory: Dwight Conquergood, anthropologist James Clifford5
and scholar Noel Carroll.6
Each of these authors proposes either a transformation
of writing for the purpose of a better way of describing and
analyzing either “ethnographic” or “aesthetic” objects or, in
the case of Conquergood, a non-textual, performative approach
to analysis.
To Conquergood, non-writing is seen as an alternative
for academic papers as a method of analysis. In his article
“Rethinking Ethnography...” he proposes that rethinking
the “world as performance” opens up several possibilities
for ethnographic analysis, namely for Performance and
Interpretation: “What kinds of knowledge are privileged or
displaced when performed experience becomes a way of
knowing, a method of critical inquiry, a mode of understanding?
...What are the range and varieties of performance
modes and styles that can enable interpretation and
understanding?” and for Performance and Scholarly Representation:
“What are the rhetorical problematics of performance
as a complementary or alternative form of ‘publishing’
research?”. Truth and textuality are not necessarily
synonyms. This cannot be overemphasized.
James Clifford gave us a very useful model of historical
changes of the idea of beauty in western art and art
theory. His archeological study on the validation of nonwestern
(“primitive”) objects by European artists and critics
in the early decades of this century, shows how the evaluation
of this art as “exotic” is an ideological construct aimed
at a specific site in the market: the critical discourse. (This
issue is very much present in European dance festivals
nowadays that seem to always require the presence of that
exotic.) His essays also show how both “content” and
“form” are ideological constructs.7
Noel Carroll’s “situational criticism,” based in philosopher
Karl Popper’s model of a logic of the situation, claims
that “...dance is also a human activity; and to make someone
understand a dance or a choreographic style one
needs to make clear the logic of the situation in which the
dance was created or the choreography developed.”
With all these references in mind, I proposed to the
students a framework.8 The following were the points we
started from in trying to create alternative forms of criticism:
To say that a work of art has a content is an animistic
projection—or reification. Things don’t have “contents.”
Meaning exists because humans exist. When
we are interpreting a work of art, what we are really
doing is interpreting an intersection of cultural and
individual definitions (the artist’s and the critic’s) of
what art is. Criticism should be a discourse on these
intersections. This is seldom recognized by journalistic
dance criticism.
The first premise has as direct consequence the inclusion
of a multiplicity of levels of analysis in any interpretation
of a work of art. Any discourse or interpretive
model is partial. All we have are different discourses
that can help us shed light on different aspects
of the piece. In this sense a Marxist, or a psychoanalytical,
or a semiotic interpretation partially illuminates
but never encompasses the wholeness of the work. In
this sense a dance also never is. This has been the
common sense of semiotics for at least thirty years but
somehow the verb to be is still a tyrant in dance criticism.
(Someone’s dance is this or is that.)
The first two premises lead to the importance of acknowledging
that there is a Self behind the lines of the
review. I would argue that part of the logic of the
situation in dance criticism is to make that Self explicit
to the reader. The acknowledging of this presence adds
performativity (presence and the acknowledging of
presence) to the text and dissolves the figure of authority
in the abstraction of the words. (During the workshop
we talked about these issues illustrating them with
James Clifford’s articles on the politics of ethnographic
texts.)
Following the ideas of performativity we explored
Dwight Conquergood’s proposition of performance as
an alternative to ethnographic field notes and kept in
mind that maybe text is not always an adequate medium
to express precisely a certain idea. Other levels of
textuality were explored.
We kept in mind how Gregory Bateson showed that
description is fundamental but always short of the
object described.9
We followed Noel Carroll’s proposition that the role of
the critic would be to clarify the logic of the dance for
the reader by pointing to and explaining the choreographer’s
choices in view of her or his intentions. My
attraction to Carroll’s model derives mainly from the
weight all the elements of a dance assume under this
perspective and the degree of awareness it requires to
include choreographic details that transcend movement—from
lighting and costumes to the casting of
dancers.
• The choreographic analysis that the students and I did
throughout the course tried to identify and interpret
those choices, seeing them as potentially meaningful.
My only discomfort with Carroll’s theory lies in its
intellectual spring: the rationalistic body of knowledge
of Popper which seems to abhor any suggestion of an
unconscious life.10 A life that we intently looked for in
the interpretation of choreographies.
• We kept in mind that at a certain level the choreographer
expresses unconscious or symbolic material. We
looked for those materials as structuring choreographies
and tried to add them into the analysis.
• We kept in mind that there is a capitalistic market
behind the dance reviewed. The critic is part of that
market. The critic should make that relation explicit.
Some politics
A polemics in the U.S. still seems to revolve around
the issues of “descriptive” versus “interpretive” criticism.11
During the workshop, students and I agreed that there is no
point in developing serious criticism if one is not grounded
in the observed material; but also, through the analysis of
several American dance critics’ writings, we agreed that
pure description is always short of the object and tiring to
the reader; on the other hand, delirious interpretation does
not even get to the object and manages to be quite irritating
for the reader.
My opinion is that at this moment a revision of criticism
needs to leave these common-sensical discussions and
regain some political momentum: journalistic critics don’t
seem to be worrying very much about the question of
criticism in a capitalistic market of art and its role of selfempowerment.
If there was a reason for experimenting
with critique in the workshop at EDDC, it was political.
Dance criticism is still judgmental in a very bourgeois way.
As Spanish playwright and critic Antonio Lera would say,
often the critic likes to play a role more fit for the Pope
But the point is that the making of judgments is a
necessary motor in the politics of frustration and desiremaking,
both essential for the production and circulation of
choreographies. And it is here that the inclusion of per-
formativity in writing can be a crucial way of reshaping the
critic’s use of words.
Doubt as gift
I believe that one of the political consequences of
performative writing and criticism as performance (and of
the workshop at the EDDC) is the inclusion of uncertainty
through acknowledging in the writing the existence of the
ephemeral in both the dance and in the writing on the
dance. The double presence of Self and of doubt seems to
me particularly relevant and politically important. Per-
formativity in writing diminishes the authoritarian voice of
the text, as Dwight Conquergood would say, “The performance
paradigm is an alternative to the atemporal, decon-
textualized, flattening approach of text-positivism.”
But this inclusion of doubt in reviews can be quite
problematic; for newspapers want “news” that is “true”
(whatever that means ideologically). So we also have to
leave out of criticism the information on anthropological
constructs, fantasmatic12 contents, social and political issues
or constraints embedded in the piece reviewed. This exclusion
perpetuates the ideology of physical virtuosity, the
uncritical definition of beauty, and phraseologies such as
“gorgeous bodies,” “witty composition” and so on, totally
removed from social and intellectual constructs.
The discomfort experienced by my own editors—
always willing, I have to say, to allow for quite a wide
range of writing approaches—was very clear when, for the
first time in four years of journalism (from literary criticism,
to scientific journalism, to dance reviewing), I had
'some texts on dance refused. For me, this not only locates
the role of art journalism in the system of aesthetic and
capital value production but made me think for the first
time who I was really writing to when writing about dance.
It made me see that I was, first, writing for the journalistic
community in the run for factuality and “truth;” and then,
to producers and choreographers eager to accumulate voluminous
press-packages about their products for the sake of
sale and circulation. And it made me see that, through the
textual making and destruction of objects of desire, criticism
embodies in its writing the complex relations between
artist, producer, critic and capital in establishing the aesthetic
(and therefore commercial) value of the work of art.

A trip to the field
As a corollary of the workshop I wanted the students to
experience the dreads of professional journalistic dance
criticism. Fortunately, the Springdance Festival in Utrecht
[Holland], the epitome of the European dance festival, was
happening at the time.13 So we went on a field trip: four
performances in a seven hour marathon and after that, three
days to show up with a result. The assignment was that
the students would have to create a critical discourse—that
is, a reflective insight on what they saw. The form of that
discourse would have to be harmonious with their own
mental processes, in a language they would feel at ease
with (verbal, pictorial, non-verbal, etc.). A final rule was
that “impressionistic” texts would be considered a failure in
the task. Again, I was experimenting in interpretation (or,
to use the jargon, in “hermeneutics”) not in impressionism.
A few of the results are on the following pages. Some of
the students decided to stay inside the boundaries of written
discourse. Among these, some would complement the
typical essay form with a more open, poetic form. None of
the students responded with movement which I considered
a wise decision. Again, all impressionism was out of the
question and to respond critically to a performance through
another performance would imply to create a whole new
choreography (a valid option of analysis according to
Conquergood’s models), something they wouldn’t have the
time to do.
So what?
There is a Portuguese saying that claims that hell is full
of good intentions. I do feel that at this point the complexity
of the questions raised by performative writing and by
performative criticism are but touched on in the students’
and my own attempts to bring a different shape to the
rationalistic hierarchy of Truth=Word/Untruth=Body. But
if criticism is ideology, then to provoke in the students a
responsible response to that predicament is already to happily
deserve my own share of hell.
Actually, in this hierarchy, truthfulness (which is not
the same as “truth”) does not necessarily have to relate to
the means of discourse (body or words) but to the semantics
of that discourse. Not to words per se but to a certain
way of using words. To conclude, I would like to make
clear that the issue shouldn’t be to “fight” words or to
“distrust” words, but to be aware of both the limits of
language and of the political weight given to textual discourse
in academia and in criticism. A weight that, when
tyrannic, makes the world of expression and intellection
smaller. What I do distrust are mental cages where words’
magical weight are used in order to perpetuate an ideology
of art production and its aesthetic, political and economic
premises. In the case of European dance, a sometimes
absurd system of production and circulation is literally
embedded in linguistic irresponsibility, usually in the texts
that festival programmers and curators write to justify their
aesthetic and market choices of what to present and to
exclude.
The heavenly part of all this is that one week after the
EDDC course my letter of resignation was at my editor’s
desk. Now I feel free to write (or to non-write) about
dance.

----------------------

WORK IN PROCESS, WORDS IN PROGRESS experimental dance as performance
by Sidsel Pape


This is the February 1994 draft of
an ongoing writing that was inspired
by a theory workshop I took with
Andre Lepecki in April 1993 at the
Center for New Dance Development in
Arnhem, Netherlands (now the European
Dance Development Center).

I am standing in the doorway
of a studio. The late afternoon sun
colors the room warm yellow. On the
floor some people are moving together
in a slow sliding manner. Their bodies
contribute to a large lump of moving
limbs. Many eyes are closed, and
when open they don’t look at each
other. Wooden floorboards whistle
when naked feet rub against them.
Movement is controlled just enough to
avoid another body’s private parts.
Satisfied sighs happen when one body
takes the weight of another. A blend
of assorted body odours float in the
air, fill up my nose in spite of the open
window in the back. The activity
performed in front of me seems aimless,
nameless. An undefined, unpersonalized
figure of flesh. Something is
missing, something else is too insisting.
I leave and walk away.
Some years ago, desperate to find
an artistic expression, I dived into an
experimental dance community in
Holland, and became a student of the
Center for New Dance Development
(CNDO) in Arnhem. I spent four
years inside this world, one of the
most claustrophobic experiences of my
life. I felt I was part of a protective,
tight group of people, unaware of the
“outside world.” I used to think there
was something wrong with me not
being able to enjoy watching contact
improvisation or other experimental
dance* performances. I was told that
if I could open up and trust, that
would be my cure. I fought my resistance
and struggled to forget my first
responses.
Eventually I succeeded in “understanding”
the movement language.
Suddenly everything I saw gave meaning
to me. All I needed to do was
switch on my fantasy button. I realized
that everyone else in the dance
community was doing the same thing.
They put on miracle glasses through
which everything looked wonderfully
meaningful.
But the magic did not last for me.
Maybe I got the wrong type of miraclt
glasses. Maybe they broke while I
was dancing. Maybe I got tired of
seeing my own fantasies. According
to my sense of justice, I could not
continue to look for certain dance
performance ingredients and ignore
others. I could not make myself see
the way I was suggested to, and that
got me into a lot of trouble.
I educated myself as an experimental
dance performer. I wanted to
learn skills so that I could communicate
with people through performance
What I discovered was that I don’t
believe in experimental dance as a
medium of communication. It is
crucial to me to investigate why, and
what makes me doubt experimental
dance as performance.
I believe that a performer’s intention
is to communicate with other
people, the audience. Likewise, I
presume that an audience member attends
a performance out of a curiosity
about whatever “message” the performer
has to give. In a performance
situation, both audience and performer
contribute to the creation of communication
lines between them. This exchange
is the performance. The per7
former invites the audience to perceive
and receive her message. The audience
agrees to the offer and gives the
performer time and trust. This agreement
gives the performer an active
and powerful position. The audience
allows the performer to take them
towards something unknown. For
most people, meeting with the unknown
has a fearful curiosity to it.
Whenever fear is involved, there is
danger of fight and rejection. But
there is also a chance for exchange
and acceptance of the unknown. This
meeting between known and unknown
creates the dynamic of the performance
situation.
There are many examples of audiences
of experimental dance refusing
to take this art expression seriously.
How often have I heard from audience
members, “I could have done it myself,”
or “I didn’t get it.” This is the
reaction of somebody who feels
fooled. I believe that in most cases
when an audience reacts with rejection,
the performer has not been able
to project her message well enough.
The communication lines have not
been developed, the exchange has not
happened.
In the experimental dance community
I find myself in, a negative response
from the audience is often not
respected. It is seen as an ignorant
argument from someone who is not
willing to understand. Rejection is
met with rejection and “war” is the
outcome. I am sure there are audience
members who are unable to meet the
unfamiliar, but I think they must be in
the minority. I refuse to believe that
people are so self-destructive that they
spend money and time to be bored.
Of course, a performer may intend to
provoke her audience to reject a performance.
That is a conscious choice
I can accept.
In my opinion, today’s performers
are learning to be self-respecting artists,
not only serving puppets for demanding
audiences. However, I am
seeing that performers are indulging in
this position. Rather than using the
power of the performer’s role to relate
and communicate with audiences, I see
performers being self-absorbed on
stage. Today’s perspective on the
audience, or lack of it, has developed
into a symptom I choose to call “audience
denial.” In suffering from audience
denial there can be no exchange
in the performance situation, and consequently
unsuccessful performances.
I think that one of the major problems
with experimental dance as performance
lies with the performers.
There seems to be a basic lack of skill
in how to project a message to an
audience without chasing them out of
the theater. Likewise it seems to be a
problem to invite an audience in without
running off stage. I call those
suffering from these problems Internal
and External performers.
The Internal performer comes on
stage and gives an impression of discomfort.
What she is experiencing is
an instant of identity crisis. Her focus
is on her emotional and sensational
experiences. She wants to be “natural”
on stage, like her private rehearsals
allow her to. Soon she realizes
that her inner worlds, so lively to her,
do not actually reach the audience the
way she intends. Unfamiliar with this
sudden lack of control, she withdraws
to protect herself from the threat of an
audience. This goes against her intention
for performing which is “I want
you to see inside of me.” She finds
herself in a void, unable to express,
and worse, unable to scream for help.
All everyone can do is to hope for the
lights to fade out to bring the suffering
to an end.
The External performer has most
likely been through the pain described
above and refuses to fall into that gap
again. Her intention for performing is
“I don’t want you to see inside of
me;” she wants to “come out” and
“express.” Paradoxically she finds
herself showing-off, where nothing but
her big fat ego is stamping around the
stage. In her desperate attempt to
project, she comes out of her body
and has no access to her inner world.
Her intention to invite her audience is
well meant, but she is not prepared to
meet them. She ends up screaming
everyone’s ears off, her own included.
Numb and deaf she has no chance to
tune in, but seeks rescue by throwing
herself in the audience’s lap.
Over the past five years I have
seen many experimental dance performances.
I am still puzzled by why so
few of these dancers are able to communicate
successfully through this
medium. I have come to the conclusion
that one of the reasons for this
difficulty is the idea of performing
“natural.”
“Natural” expression was introduced
during the art era we operate
within today, and often takes form as
pedestrian movement and behavior on
stage. I suggest that “natural” came
as a reaction against a traditional
performance mode in which scenes
and emotions are performed beyond
“natural,” in an exaggerated manner,
to make sure the storyline or theme
comes through to the audience, who is
familiar with its style and symbols.
Experimental dance favours “natural”
expression on stage. The symbols
within “natural” expression are
uniquely part of the creator’s personal
“language,” which is often foreign to
her audience. This makes her performance
challenging. She has to “translate”
to the audience, which requires
sophisticated performance skills. If
she does not have these skills, communication
lines are hard to develop.
Consequently the message will not
always be perceivable to the audience.
I find so-called “natural” expression
fascinating, but I seldom see it
performed well. It seems to me that
when stylization was sacrificed in
favour of “natural” expression, an
important performing skill was buried
along with it. The intention of traditional
performance was to create a
larger-than-life experience, an “unreal
reality” on stage. To project a larger-
than-life experience requires an altered
state of consciousness, an expanded
awareness. I call this condition a
“heightened state of being,” which was
part of the traditional performer’s skill
and, in my opinion, is rare to see in
today’s experimental dance performers.
I believe when experimental dancers
wish to perform “natural” on stage,
they actually want to perform “being.”
There is much confusion around this
issue. Many performers seem to think
that performing “being” is easy. It’s
being “natural.” I believe that “being”
doesn’t happen just because we happen
to be human beings, least of all
on stage. Performing “being” needs to
be practiced as any other performance
activity.
I have seen a couple of performers,
however, who successfully perform
“being.” I would like to call
them Integrated. This performer comes
on stage with a sense of comfort. I
feel welcomed by her relaxed invitation
to join the performance. Gladly I
let her take me on a ride through the
worlds she creates. As an audience
member I am curious to experience
somebody else’s mind. That gives me
a rest from my worn out paths. We
, are on the same horseback but she is
in front of me. She has the reins and
she knows it, respecting and enjoying
her power. She jumps us from one
world to the other. She knocks over
everything she has built up, and sets
me back in my audience seat. She
tosses my attention back and forth and
I am still with her. She knows that
everything she sees, I see. She makes
me look into her worlds from inside
and outside. I have a bird’s eye view,
I’m flying. My eyes have the sights
of Gods. With the impression that
I’m in complete control, I’m really
manipulated in the most sophisticated
manner and I love it. The Integrated
performer’s intention for performing is
“I want you to see yourself through
me.”
The Integrated performer has succeeded
in building communication
lines. She “translates” her chosen
“language” to her audience. What
enables her to do so is her performance
skills. She has trained to
access a “heightened state of being.”
This state enables her to project her
experience to the audience. She is
projecting in the act of being aware of
herself from the inside and outside
simultaneously. She has the introvert
and the extrovert qualities and she inhabits
them so entirely that she transcends
them. She observes herself in
relation to all her actions, to her coperformers,
to her audience, and to the
performance. She is relating. In real
life it is an almost impossible task to
enter complete awareness as described.
In the performance situation the performer
sets a frame around what she
plans to relate to and when. Within
this frame it is possible to acquire the
“heightened state of being” for a limited
period of time, in a designated
space, within a defined action.
I am in my ninth month of writing.
This text is now bom again out of the
same desperate need that made me
give birth to it again and again and
again, the need to sort out my thoughts
to understand the feelings I have about
experimental dance as performance.
The words are hard to find. Through
talking, writing and trashing my ideas,
fresh words are coming and coming
and coming. This endless journey has
helped me clarify why I don’t believe
in experimental dance as performance.
Surprisingly, the better I get at
sharpening my ideas, the more excited
I get about dancing and performing. It
seems that the confidence I develop
from using words feeds my appreciation
for expressing without words.
What satisfies me the most on my
search is the connection I am experiencing
to the rest of the world. Suddenly
I am aware of my position as an
artist in a much larger context. I
belong. That gives me confidence as
an artist, performer and dancer. I can
communicate, I can reach other people.
We live in the same world.
Sad but true, experimental dance
performances are seldom visited by
people other than artists. There is,
however, an audience out there, people
from the “outside world,” and I want
to share with these people as well as
the already existing audience. I think
many people in the experimental
dance community share that wish witl
me.
I feel that the community I have
been part of for the past four years
suffers from a lack of verbal communication
and constructive thoughtsharing.
The “discussions” that do
happen at our school are often coloured
by individuals stating their
views and feelings more with the
intention of being heard and accepted
than with sharing their opinions to
deepen an issue of discussion. Some
people choose to explain this disperse
level of discussion as a product of the
problem of non-native English speakers,
as most of the students come frot
all around Europe. I believe this is
only one part of the problem, because
the native English-speaking people at
our school have just as much difficulty
expressing their views about dance
and performance as the others. I thini
it is due more to the fact that we do
not share a common language to discuss
dance and art.
Dance is a non-verbal language
and dancers are not used to expressin
through words. Some dancers say the
it is their privilege not to express verbally.
I think this is everyone’s misfortune.
Dancers hold precious experience
as communicators of a nonverbal
language. In a word-ridden
world, non-verbal languages have
invaluable worth. I believe that danc
ers and society as a whole will benefi
from the evolution of a verbal language
that serves the non-verbal expression
of dance. By mastering this
language, dancers can communicate
better and support each other’s proces
through constructive criticism. Mayb
some will find what I have, that deve
oping verbally enriches and excites tb
dancing. Hopefully this communication
will extend to the “outside
world.” Maybe even dance critics wi
become better convinced about experi
mental dance as performance. It is al
up to the experimental dancers whether
the situation will change or not.



----------------------

GO OUT FROM YOUR ROOM
Min Tanaka & Butoh at Bennington College

by Mary Ruefle


MIN TANAKA, master and
innovator in the Japanese dance form
of Butoh, is an internationally recognized
performer and teacher. Created
by avant-garde Japanese dancers in
the postwar period, Butoh draws upon
agrarian myth, the theater of Antonin
Artaud, and the Western modern
dance. The rise of Butoh coincided
with similar expressions of freedom in
art, music and architecture in postwar
Japan.

Min studied formal dance and
classical ballet while growing up, but
became captivated with Butoh when he
saw a performance in the early ’60s
by Tatsumi Hijikata, Butoh’s acknowledged
founder. Since then, Min has
carved a niche as part of that revolutionary
movement and through his own
unique style, characterized by a freedom
of form and motion and the special
union between the artist and his
environment.

Min began performing in the late
1960s, frequently dancing nude in both
urban and country landscapes and
earning the nickname, ‘the naked
dancer’. Since the ’70s, Min has
conducted ‘‘Body Weather” workshops,
a series of movement concepts
and techniques used for training the
body. Today, fourteen Body Weather
laboratories are active internationally.
In 1981, Min Tanaka formed MAI
JJJKU, his international collaborative
dance company; and in 1982, he was
a founding member of Plan B performing
space in Tokyo. He has toured as
a soloist and with Mai Juku throughout
the U.S., Canada, Japan, Australia,
Vietnam, and Russia.
Min collaborates with a wide
range of artists, musicians, writers,
philosophers and researchers, and has
pioneered a multi-disciplinary paradigm
for expression.
In the spring of ’93, Min came to
Bennington College in Vermont for his
first college residency in the U.S.
Sponsoring faculty member Terry
Creach gathered for CQ the accompanying
photos and student writings
along with Min’s evaluations of this
fertile period. In addition, Vermont
poet Mary Ruefle offers a reflection
on Min’s solo performance of Kimono
at the College. [Eds.]

by Kirstin Kantner
Through a Visiting Professor grant
from the Japan Foundation, the Dance
Division of Bennington College in
Bennington, Vermont was privileged
to invite Min Tanaka for a six-week
residency, March 22 to April 30,
1993—his first American college
residency. As a prominent international
performer, choreographer, and
company director, Min is generally not
available in this way. He is also a
farmer, and had to continue, by fax, to
direct the spring planting at the Body
Weather Farm in Hakushu, Japan, his
home base.
His time at Bennington was full
and varied, including Body Weather
workshops which were open to the
public; a solo performance of Kimono;
and a duet performance, Improvisation,
with Bennington professor and
noted percussionist, Milford Graves—
to one of the largest audiences ever
assembled in Bennington College’s
Martha Hill Dance Theater.
Min taught an intensive course
titled, “Butoh Dance,” and collaborated
with faculty Terry Creach and Sue
Rees, and dancers and sculptors from
Multi-Disciplinary Performance class
to create Night-Day—a campus-wide,
site-specific work that included performances
by Min, students, and faculty
—a cast of thirty. During the residency,
Min Tanaka and Milford
Graves traveled to Burlington, Vermont’s
Flynn Theater for a repeat of
Improvisation, and Min traveled to
New York City for a solo performance
of Seasons at Performance Space 122.
In the Butoh Dance course, Min
presented, or coaxed us through, exercises,
games and talks aimed at freeing
the glue which holds our boundaries,
habits and expectations together. The
integral connection of the senses to the
body’s range of movement was emphasized
in dozens of creative and
surprising ways in order to build a
completely organic and authentic form
of dance—a dance in direct reaction to
the senses and emotions. One afternoon
was spent exploring an expanse
of the early spring outdoors blindfolded
with a guide who remained silent
and out of reach (unless we got into
danger). One morning we all jumped
rope amidst laughter and yells of encouragement
to the hesitant from the
brave.
During the last weeks of the course
we focused on 65 movement images
for isolated parts of the body such as:
fish swim in your stomach; your face
becomes your mother’s or father’s
face; your hands climb a waterfal
“Min believed that movement starts
as a feeling within, and only then does
it have the possibility of becoming
outer movement. He also strongly
feels that even if a feeling fails to
evoke outer movement, it is still dance
(or still dance!),” wrote Eva Fitzgerald
in her student evaluation for the
course.
The most important lesson that I
came away with was quite the opposite
of a knowledge of a new dance style
or technique; it was instead the very
beginning of an understanding of the
essential, soulful, and barest bones of
this expression called dance: the difference
between how one’s body moves
when one interprets or “acts out” a
waterfall, for instance, and when one
attempts to feel, to really be a waterfall.
All of us who were inspired by
Min Tanaka strive to keep this sensitized
way of living with us even after
he’s gone. Min writes back from
Japan: “When I’m working in the
field, sometime suddenly the landscape
and air and sound of Bennington visit
my body... I had many inspirations
from your environment, and I feel
some things are growing in my body.
Tomorrow I am going to dance, I am
very much interested in my improvisation.
I am not sure, but some change
(big!) will happen.”


STUDENT EVALUATIONS
OF THE BUTOH COURSE (excerpts)
During this intense Butoh class, I have
experienced a change of perception:
dance is not only techniques and controlled
body movements, but also a movement
of the mind. I gained a new appreciation
of the world around me and the
connection between nature and human
movement.
I came to appreciate specificity, and slow
rich time. There is plenty of time to live,
just not time to be indecisive.
Pushing limits—carrying heavy rocks
in bare feet 45 degrees F. outside; covering
our eyes and having to follow a path
with concrete directions; trusting our partners
with every exercise; letting go; embracing
fear around emotion (I took it
seriously), but Min could always laugh.
His gentle eyes swept over us identifying,
understanding and a bit of giggling. He
showed, well I understand, that life is hart
and painful but we must laugh to appreciate
In one class, all the students chose a
partner and each took a turn being blindfolded.
Min designated a route of obstacles
for the blind student to find. The
■ outcome was a huge surprise, most students
were unable to complete this simple
task in an area we all walk through on a
daily basis. In this exercise and others,
the students didn’t master the task but became
aware of their own disability, i.e.,
\ how ^pendent we are on our eyes and
how lame our other senses have become.
Min taught me to slow down and build my
awareness of the many small sensations
which we are continually blocking out.
Once this awareness is stronger it can be
used as a steady foundation to inform
movement. The small movements came
from written images designed to be stimulation
from outside for movement and
dance. This is contrary to much dance
which is interaction with oneself, or going
inside to find the creativity. Creativity
came out of interaction with the small
movements.

The main focus in the class was on 65
“small movement images,” which we
would practice with partners, alternating
roles of giving the images and feeling
them. The images engaged specific parts
of the body as a source for movement.
Examples: torso becomes mist; holding a
just bom naked baby; waterfall running
down your sides; you have 100 meters
long hair blowing in the wind while simultaneously
your legs are walking up a
strong river. By the final week we were
working with the head, arms, torso, and
legs all moving from separate images
simultaneously. These exercises demanded
both a focus and an awareness of the
body’s feeling. As we worked in this way,
I found that I became more conscious of
my body and its ability to express.
It broadened my conception of dance and
put me in touch with parts of my body that
I never consciously worked with before
(like the heart). The most striking experience
occurred when my partner had to
make me move without touching me, and
I felt my partner’s heat on my skin and
discovered with surprise that my arm was
moving in the direction she was thinking
of! Min put me in touch with the small
movements in and outside of me. For
example, on the last day of classes, the
students were asked to hug a tree and
feel its movements! Min showed us how
dance couldn’t always be seen—it had to
be felt.
Min encouraged us to find our own movements.
We experienced the world blind,
talked with trees, were led around by a
string, and beat a jump rope’s wrath. Min
taught me that any daily experience can
have some kind of lesson, whether for
dance or life in general.
We placed a very heavy rock on our
chests, and just let it rest there feeling the
weight in our body, the changes of beat
that would occur in our hearts. Watching
my heartbeat transfer from deep within my
ribcage to a huge, cmshing rock that lay
heavily on my chest brought me more joy
than imaginable.
In the blindfolded walk, I was tmly able to
get a sense of my surroundings and feel
what it was like to use my instincts and
other senses to move instead of being so
conscious of watching and thinking.

MIN’S EVALUATIONS
OF STUDENTS IN HIS BUTOH CLASS


Train your lower part of the body, and
find good stream In your legs.
I like your small movement Good
density. Try to find out your own vibration
and many different speed, Inside
of your body.
Many sensations are following after the
vlsuality, and these sensations maintained
the history of dance. Movement
are not always the dance.
You need strong and honest desire of
yourself, for your neighborhood. Try
to find out unconventional movement,
and be natural.
The mood in Japanese Is share your
energy in the space. You and your
body can find many center In your
environment
Study more from your neighbor’s
movement and customs. I hope you
can spend much more useless time.
Gaze and get your deep reason to
dance, and practice as hardly as possible
you can, with your passion. Don’t
cheat anything which come in contact
with you.
You can change your daily body size
by dancing. Try to find out your basic
energy.
Get your feeling of the body, much
more Inner and thinner. You need
thinner muscle for to move
You have good concentration and
quietness when you move. You can
use your energy much wider.
Look at the others’ movement and try
to imitate, it makes you more rich and
Interest
I like your strong emotion, and
distance from the right power. You
need strong ankles and calves, so you
can control your upper body more.
Enjoy your life and find something
which you can concentrate more than
dance.

Step over your physical limit of the
movement You must Investigate you
dally movement
Your movement are too much to the
front Get the feeling of your back.
Upper part of your body has less
movement; you can find out many
small movement, then you can makel
bigger.
Your legs must be trained more, thm
you can feel more about middle level
scenery. Keep your quiet thinking.
Feel more sensation from your feet
And your hands must find out many
vocabulary from your life.
Step over your strong concentration,
is still enough, you need more, then
you will have much more space.
If you have interest In something, yot
have to express It through the bodyi
through the head.
I hope you can get the feeling of “let
or more.” Your body feeling Is alwsj
middle intensity. I think you need
strong modulation.
You have to go out from your room.
And listen, watch, observe the
environment of your body.
I have no Idea about you. It seems ft»
me you kept staying outside of the
space.
You can dance Into much more frag
area of your present Keep dancing
Train your ankles softer and stronge
Compare to your delicate inside, you
movement is too simple and too limi
ed. Imitate your environment like
nature does.
Look at your muscles. I feel It’s too
much. You can dance with your ml!
mal volume of muscles and with you
good spirit. Keep dancing every
moment.


On MIN TANAKA’S KIMONO
Letters to Christina Svane
by Mary Ruefle
April 3, 1993
I went to see Min Tanaka perform
a solo at the college. I must tell you
his performance was quite possibly the
most powerful dance performance I
have ever seen—which I shall try to
explain—a difficult proposition. The
audience sat/stood around a cleared
space in a large carpeted lobby of the
arts building but when the extraordinary
music began (opera—I believe,
Italian—a woman’s aria) Min began to
dance outside the building—through
glass—at night—maybe 25 yards
away—leaning under/on a little cherry
tree, bare (the tree) in the cold spring
night with the wind blowing. Tanaka
was rice-powdered to a ghostly effect—with
black kimono and his hair
being lifted in the wind and the dance
began there, at a distance, through
glass, eventually working its (his) way
up to the glass, when we could see
(his face pressed against it) the “painful”
gestures. At this point he entered
the room and performed in the space
at hand—master Butoh, typical Butoh
with an informal bit/twisL The last
third of the piece was again done in
retreat—through the door, against the
glass, out under the brave little cherry
tree, the same music (the interior segment
had been silent), the same wind
blowing through his hair,—except
now, having seen him up close, we
knew what he was doing out there—
and our knowledge made no difference—for
it was there, at a distance,
that the dance was perceived to be the
most beautiful, lyrical, graceful dance
I had ever seen—so what was powerful
to me was the sudden realization
that pain when seen from a distance
appears to be beautiful—and that was
what struck me most about the performance,
what haunts me and what I
cannot forget—and it leads me to
wonder if a “beautiful, lyrical” dance
when seen from the right angle or distance
might not appear to be painful—and,
finally, it appears to me
there is no such thing as “joyous” or
“painful” dancing/movement—both are
illusions. The distance of life from the
thing—it does not appear to be spring,
but it is.

April 8,1993
C—
I spoke with Martha Wittman, a
member of the dance faculty at Bennington,
about Min Tanaka’s performance—the
one I tried, so awkwardly,
to describe to you in my last letter—
Martha was a source of great understanding
and clarity for me, helping to
put it in perspective. Min’s body was
not covered with rice-powder, as I
thought, but with earth, clay from
various parts of the earth that have
meant something for him—southern
France, his farm in Japan—and the
kimono he wore belonged to his mother,
who is dead—at times he was the
kimono, at times he was his mother, at
times he was a baby, a toddler, at
times he was the cherry tree, at times
he was a bird, stepping with claws
instead of feet—like Keats, he seems
to “peck about the gravel and become
the sparrow”—he seems to have no
identity of his own but to be a medium.
I also hadn’t guessed what Martha
told me—that the entire performance
was improvised—astonishing—
of course, if you are going to be a
medium you must improvise—there is
no other way. Ultimately, my ‘realization’
that “pain at a distance appeared
beautiful” was actually closer to the
mark than I thought—because I think
at times, even close up, I read “pain”
into what was not pain—who is to say
that a bird in joy will not appear to be
a bird in pain?—humans read pain/joy
into things and creatures—pain and joy
are our touchstones, our sentiments,
and I do think now, in retrospect, that
many of the ‘painful’ gestures were
simply bird-gestures, tree-gestures,
kimono-gestures that were like nothing
I had ever seen before, nothing I could
recognize, nothing I could embrace—
kiss—love and so mentally I was the
one who contorted them into something
I could make sense out of—
love,
M—
A Postscript
January 1994
After seeing Min Tanaka perform
Kimono at Bennington College in the
spring of 1993—a piece I described
my response to in two letters to my
friend Christie Svane—I went to see
him perform again, twice, both times
in collaboration with other artists, and
neither event moved me in the ways I
was moved, and continue to be
moved, by Kimono. I have only the
dimmest memories of the subsequent
performances, whereas I am still
haunted by the whitened face and
blowing black hair set against that
little cherry tree, which is in all probability
no cherry tree at all. In the
weeks after this image was implanted
in me, I sought out the music that was
so much a part of it: it turned out not
to be an Italian aria, but Kiri Te Kanawa
singing one of Canteloube’s
Chants D’Auvergne, a collection of
French folk songs compiled and transcribed
by the composer during the
first half of this century. The song
Tanaka used was “Bail&ro,” a kind of
banter between a shepherd and shepherdess
whose pastures are separated
by a river. A translation of the dialogue
runs like this:
— Shepherd, yonder across the river,
surely you are not having much fun?
— None at all, and are you?
— Shepherd, the grass is in flower,
come over here to tend your flock.
The grass is better in my field!
At a glance, the banter is light-hearted,
almost fun, but in fact the music is
very, very sad, straining towards an
unbearable sweetness, full of the impossibility
of crossing the river, perhaps
the uselessness of their desire, or
the uselessness of ever leaving one’s
own little world for that of another.
I’ve listened to it for a long time now,
and lately it appears to embody just
about everything I experienced in the
dance. If Tanaka was ever for a moment
his mother, surely she was in a
heaven, asking us to join her, and I
stayed on my side of the river, very
confused about whose side was the
sad side.

----------------------

GROUP

by Peggy Schwartz


Group. That7s what we've called it for years. Not
"dance group" or "the group" or "improv group"—just
"group." No blueprints. No rules—rather lots of rules all
of which we break. But a history which we love to tell
ourselves as the years go by and the story gets longer.
I've been part of group since 1983. I was very presumptuous,
really. I called Herb when I moved to Amherst, a
colleague had given me his name, and invited myself to
group one night. And, even more presumptuous, I then
assumed I was part of the group. Herb, a physicist, Mary,
an artist, Alton, a therapist and minister, were there—at
Herb and Mary's home, where group meets. Also, Mary-
ianne, a therapist. She was impatient with talking, if I
remember, wanting us to keep moving. Maryianne left
shortly after I joined. We were four for a while. Then
Becky, another dancer, joined a year or two later. We love
going over this. People have visited (we always remember
the psychologist who sweated, a dancer friend of someone's,
etc.). We even had a new member for a year—'til he left
and took a job elsewhere, but not until after encouraging us
to develop and then perform an initiation ritual. So it's
been us five for a long time. Although when I first shared
this writing with group Herb was quick to ask me how I
know I am really a member.
Our medium is movement and dance. We improvise.
So what happens in group? For years my kids thought I
went and got high once a week with some friends. Herb
and Mary's kids hung out on the top steps peeking through
the banister. It must have seemed strange.
A typical night: Clear the room. Music. Free form
dancing—self warm-up—interaction or not—little conversations
or not. A structure—group improvisation. Solos—
with or without images. Talking. Put the furniture back.
And then eat. In the kitchen.
The Crystals. Years back we went through a phase
where the evening's group dancing would end with each
person performing a solo "crystal," a movement theme, an
image, a feeling, which reached for the essence of the evening^
experience, or grew from a life theme of importance
at the moment. As part of our non-serious seriousness or
serious non-seriousness we played with naming ourselves
The Crystals. That year we met on Tuesdays...thus "The
Tuesday Night Crystals" were bom. The following year we
became "The Tuesday Night Crystals Who Meet on
Wednesdays." The title gradually became part of the history
we reiterate.
Structures. Simple or complicated, a way of focusing
our attention. Duets with trio transitions. Or trios with
duet transitions. Or some variation thereof. I always get
confused. Is the "trio" the dance or the "duet"? And does
it matter! All kinds of variations possible on the above.
Solos to duets, duets to solos. Herb then figures out how
many dances there will be. Everyone else says it doesn't
matter.
Images and solos. We almost always end with solos. A
way of capturing something essential, vital, of the moment,
of having everyone's attention, in the moment. Years back
we timed them. Two minute solos. Three minute solos.
One minute solos. And now we don't. Did the timer break
or get lost or simply no longer serve a purpose?
For years now we share images. One structure: the
group sits close around whoever's turn it is to dance. All
close eyes. Light touch on the person in the center. Empty
the mind. Allow an image to arise in your consciousness—a
picture, a sound, a kinesthetic sensation. Catch the first one.
No censoring or waiting for a "better" one. Tell it to the
dancer. Then a solo. How delighted I get, tickled and bemused,
when similar images occur around the circle. A
validation of the non-verbal sharing, intuitive relating, we
practice together. Sometimes we seem to go for the archetypal,
sometimes geometric and formal. Occasionally we get
goofy and all start seeing salamis.
What does this not say? That for about two years we
used "Little Creatures" by Talking Heads as warm-up music
every week. That Gloria Gaynor's "I Will Survive" is our
theme song. That sometimes the men dance self-consciously
as "the men" and sometimes the women do likewise. That
Herb—if we're not alert—might he down and go to sleep.
That Becky and I, as we work together, have to be careful
not to get started talking shop. That Mary makes incredibly
witty wisecracks. That Alton can reach the ceiling with a
finger and sometimes becomes a connection between heaven
and earth.
"A little more about each of us" was the group advice
after reading my first draft. Here goes...
Herb keeps us feeling guilty if there's a movement afoot
to cancel for a week. He makes the calls that pull us together
after a summer or a winter break. He looks rabbinical in
an old-fashioned way, a startling contrast to his commitment
to developing as an expressive dancer/mover. The images
Herb offers sometimes reflect his knowledge of physics—
fields of forms, geometric, changing, fractal-ish. As group
happens in his home, we share, in a weekly way, his way of
fathering, family-ing. So often I think how profoundly
family life and roles have changed when sharing Herb's
way of being with his kids. Two or three generations ago
he would have been part of an orthodox Jewish community.
His grandfather was a famous kosher butcher on the Lower
East Side for decades. The observances are there, as he and
Mary raise their family steeped in Jewish traditions. And,
from time to time, in his solos, I catch glimpses of another
time, another place, the life his might have been. Seated
facing us, eyes closed, waiting for movement, dark curly
beard, hands start to move as if speaking blessings from an
ancient time. Sometimes his brow and face start working
sounds may emerge as he connects to places in himself that
need to move to be shared and revealed. He has practiced
dance and learned ease and comfort in his body. I marvel
at the choices that brought Herb to value this.
Mary. A visual artist, mother of two, a wit. She's married
to Herb...not always an easy role (what would the
wisecrack be to that observation?). Keeps us growing.
Encourages newness amidst our familiarity, challenges
perceptions. Living with the self-challenge of pursuing her
art in a time when so many people define themselves by
employment status. Rich to share her growth and changes
along this pathway. Gratifying to hear her recently expressing
a sense of rightness and delight in her choices. In our
dancing Mary and I often become animal. Last year we got
into a fight. I pulled her hair. Got carried away. Didn't
realize I had pulled it hard. She then pulled mine. What a
shock to both of us. This became a theme for a while.
We'd circle each other, lunge, grab and grapple, laugh. I
marvel at the wisdom of her wit, look forward to her quick
commentaries, am amazed by the richly drawn images she
sees when she closes her eyes. Places or people or scenes
that are rich in color and texture and form and design. Anc
after dancing she starts cutting fruit or putting on water for
tea or finding bowls for ice cream. It has been such a pleasure
for me, over these years, to sit at her table, accept that
nurturing, let down from my own activity in that role.
Reminds me of the ease with which aunts and uncles would
be in and out of each other's homes when I was a kid.
Comfort on so many levels.
Alton. He's tall, slender and fit. A blend of, for want of
a better term, "new age" consciousness and openness, ministerial
groundedness, psychological and therapeutic astuteness,
and hardworking gardener, builder and back hills
homesteader. He's funny and wise, offering insights into
himself or others in a way that makes for real laughter. I
treasure that Alton treasures this group. He's like a bridge
or link between and among several groups in the area.
Alton has evolved work which draws on all he has done, as
a minister, dancer, therapist. A special kind of insight,
teaching and leadership, not defined or practiced in traditional
ways. Creating contexts. He's gifted at that And his
dancing. Alton performs solos seriously, patiently. He has
a gift for allowing characters to emerge—an old seer, a fool,
a youth—for embodying a wide range of emotion. A gift
for allowing stillness—trusting that we will stay focussed
with him as he waits, transforms, and develops the character
or image or story which comes through. Dancing with
Alton is fun and exciting, from contact duets to waltzes and
then who knows what. Always a great joy.
Then there's Becky. Hardest to write about because
group is just one part of what we share as we also share
work and families and friendship in daily ways. Duets with
Becky. I always marvel at the fineness of the bones in her
hands, long thin fingers. Delicate strength. The dancer
Becky. Able to transform images into fully realized, fully
embodied form Often performs part of a solo in profile,
linear spatial pathway, across the space, defining file space.
Sudden surprising movements. A spring to a forced arch,
an amazing extended balance. A wry glance to the audience.
Even on evenings when she arrives tired from having
taught two classes already that day and dealt with all sorts
of college governance and student advising and and and,
she finds the reserve for solos of force, dynamism, speed
and drama. So many dramatic personae. Helps keep us
aware of performing, creating, and shaping, in the moment,
fully. (Heaven forbid we become simply self-indulgent!)
Becky's ticklish (do I dare put that in?), sexy (or that?),
imaginative in movement and in responses to the movement
of others. I keep coming back to her hands—expressive,
sensitive, articulate and fine, as she is herself. I remember
years ago a former colleague, Rosalind de Mille, saying after
a performance of "Piaf," a solo for Becky, "Well, she sure is
special, our Becky." What a joy to share this kind of play
and communication together in group.
Group suggested that I include their description of me.
They sat around Herb and Mary's kitchen table and wrote:
"Peggy is our elf, wise and energetic, an enthusiastic talker
and sharer of stories, keeper of the group lore, rememberer
of birthdays, attentive to the details of the lives of .those
around her. She is the mother of three daughters whose
adolescence they all survived with closeness and friendship
intact. Peggy's bi-coastal marriage keeps her stretched but
we like to think she works her travel schedule around us.
In movement she always seems ready to connect and join
with others. Her solos begin lightly and dancerly but move
often and easily to an emotional depth. Her gestures are
reaching, but from a sense of groundedness. Peggy takes
the role of nurturer and confidante in the group. Her
warmth and valuing of our work and play together shelters
and protects the fullness of our space." It moves me to be
so lovingly witnessed.

Sometimes we blubble, as in group amoeba, forming and
reforming.
Often we laugh, sometimes full-bodied belly laughter.
More often just plain hysterics.
Sometimes group's a place to bring a problem or grief or
life disturbance and get help—verbally, non-verbally. And
sometimes it's a place to be able to leave all that aside.
A place of total trust. And I don't say that lightly. I say
that with awe—aware of a kind of weekly miracle—to be
able to gather—dance—interact—laugh—play—cry—discuss—and
know whatever is said or done, there's total
acceptance of one another.
Friendships overlap outside of group. We are part of
each other's lives, yet socially we don't all meet too often.
Group is for some other purpose than simply being with
friends. We know each other very well.
You get blackballed if you miss group. (There are no
consequences to being blackballed.) You might get two
blackballs if you didn't have a good reason. And then there
are all sorts of adolescent jokes about blueballs. Recently
the adolescent jokes focused on hard drives and floppy
discs. Use your imagination.
We give birthday inspections. A birthday inspection is
like a loving massage, with running commentary on the
new grey hair, what seems to be holding up well and
what's wearing out If you're not at group around your
birthday you can have your inspection after your birthday,
never before. But if you haven't had your inspection and
someone else's birthday comes along, you miss your turn
for a whole year! I don't think that's ever happened, although
every time this comes up, Herb insists we skipped
him about three years ago and owe him one.
We sometimes set up special lights and a video camera
and video an evening—but never remember to watch it.
We joke about performing and touring—'The Tuesday
Night Crystals Hit the Road"—and plan what we'll wear.
We don't take ourselves seriously—yet love how serious
and meaningful and real this non-seriousness is.
We each play our part in the group. Sometimes, someone,
after many years, changes their role. That's extraordinary
or ordinary, noted or not.
(I'm reminded of a book group that a girlhood friend's
parents belonged to while we were growing up. 'The
Bookworms." I imagine we serve a similar role in each
other's lives as members of that group did, feel lucky to
have a found a group as that other group did in another
time and place, with another medium)
Folk culture. Community. Art. Family. Therapy.
Group history intersects with personal history and we become
a microcosmic community—a wedding, deaths, bat
mitzvahs, graduations—the kinds of life changes one shares
over many years of knowing others. The "remember the
time..." weaves in and out of group activity, life activity.
This dance group—"Group"—provides a place to live
what I believe, what I teach. In teaching dance improvisa-
* tion, I foster group awareness, trust, openness. At the end
of each term, my students usually express anxiety and
sadness that they will no longer be a group. How extraordi-
nary—the continuity of this group in our lives.
I'm not a historian of my life—don't save programs,
keep a journal, clip clippings, or record dreams. At times I
wish I did and then think—too late—why start now?
There's a way in which group holds my history. The history
is in the movement.
Start a group! A few people—one who'll keep you
moving, one who'll make you laugh, one who brings ice
cream or champagne, depending, all who love to move. Be
faithful to your form and to your commitment to dance with
each other. Keep meeting and dancing—weeks become
months become years.
I know there are other dance groups in this area, the
Pioneer Valley in Western Massachusetts, each serving as a
touchstone for communities such as Dance Spree, contradancing,
swing dance, and Contact Improvisation jams.
Folk art. The dance goes on in many forms.
Rules come and go. The "remember when" list grows
and grows. We take such pleasure in recounting our history
to ourselves. Our bodies are changing, aging. ("No one
under 40." That's a rule now. Used to be no one under 30.
Heading toward no one under 50!)
A real concern with visitors and potential members—
that their standards will not be low enough for us...
No expectations.
The self in motion/selves in motions. Group body.
Extraordinary dancing. Simple dancing. Trusting. Laughing.
Eating ice cream
The Tuesday Night Crystals...thought it time to share.


----------------------

FROM WHERE ARE YOU CASTING, YOUR LIGHT

by David Koteen

HERESY, a movement-oriented musical
by David Koteen
So right in the middle of
deciding what to do with some ill-
gotten lucre, I thought, let’s see how I
can help eliminate cultural greed, military
and governmental power abuse,
and educational dogma. Recognizing
that the societal predilection towards
the Jewish/Christian mythology is relatively
irrelevant to our collective
well-being. And that the design and
roles of inter-gender relationships,
sexual (mis) behaviour, love and lust
are inextricably confused.
A lot of the lie of the land has to
do with language: some words are too
brittle, like “sensitive” or “queer”;
some too fat, like “diet” and “spiritual”;
or too saturated, like “pussy” and
“come.” Individual language has got
buried, beneath computers, cars, cameras,
coffee, candy and crack. I gathered
what I had gleaned over these
many years, placed in black, large,
plastic sack; and then cut a small slit
in the bottom to see what seeped out.
You need so much fuckin patience.
And willingness to risk. And integrity.
First came the H. Secondly, H E.
Then, HER. Fourthly, H E R E .
Then, H E R E S. And lastly, HER
E S Y. The orifice became larger.
Themes and scenes and characters and
songs and choreography and costumes
and set design. HERESY is a musical
with 13 songs, nine performers, four
musicians. As I got It, I wrote It. No
censoring, no judging, no holding
back. The story is crude and funny
and perverse and sexual. Not for
every one. Including select performers.
Three dropped out. Prick and
nigger, abortion and kikes, rape and
faggot. People kept getting hung up
on cunt? Oh well, nothing new under
the sun. Impossible to change ideas
and thought patterns without making
them conscious.
HERESY is about cultural cancer
and the debasement of the human
body. It is about America and the
American idiom and the media. I
intended to turn words outside in, so
the audience could put them back
together in an individualized way:
Will you choose me with your
ouzi?
In my ass or in my pou-ssy?
Ah! That’s where it’s at!
Rat-A-Tat-Tat...
Words are pure. At least like air
and oceans are pure. The same one-
nation-under-god who continue to
clearcut forests, turn rivers into septic
systems and spend fifty percent of its
massive budget on greasing the world
with military lard, owns language.
But not quite. In creating HERESY I
found a means to effect the white
middle-upper class. Not to meet force
with force, but to enter the realm in
which “abuse” and “rape” and “war”
and “more” are generated and charged;
and neutralize them.
HERESY IN BRIEFS
The central nervous system of
HERESY is the family—primary education,
instilled values, support and
lack thereof, mores. On the periphery
other relationships—church, school,
government, friends. Always human
sexuality, pulsing above, on, and beneath
the surface.
HERESY has no spine, nor heart to
speak of. Only miscellaneous limbs
and organs, waiting to be transplanted.
Choose what you need and want for
your person to thrive.
In HERESY things are not weighted.
Evil and good belong to the spectator.
The dark and shadowy side
depends from where you are casting
your light

There’s a linear, familiar story
which occurs in episodes: As the
curtain opens, Father (PaP), cloaked
all in black goes off to work, to war,
to whatever. Mother takes charge,
loves her son, dislikes her daughter,
and colludes with Son (QueueX) to
drug his Sister (Rozde) so he can have
“his way with her. And I mine.” The
Daughter resists, but, both in dance
and metaphor, is taken anyway. The
Brother (“the male in these parts”) is
accused by Sister Rozee and Mother
Culla, now anti-male, pro-female. The
Brother/Son is tried and judged. The
Father finally returns, carrying black
noose, and the Son is hung (hanged).
These characters are not archetypes,
not myths. As HERESY is a
mandala of modem American culture,
each family member is a collage of
memories.
HERESY is a movement-oriented
musical. It’s about having fun in life.
Enjoying the “good parts”—“When his
spirit 6-jS.c-Q-12.tt6 down my throat, I
cry, ‘My lord! My lord! Thou hast
not forsaken me’.” About making fun
of societal taboos, religion and sex
and gender issues, war and materialism,
self-abusive therapy and science
(the linguistics of snot).
HERESY is an erect reminder not
to nestle into the illusory nature of
things. That doing your work, i.e.,
Self realization, and helping others is
90% of the game. The underlying
politics of HERESY is to show how by
exploring your own individuation, you
aid in the dethronement of his Eminence,
the Gluttonous Lord of Cultural
Cancer.
Who rules your subconscious? and
conscious mind. And who would like
to? The first characters you meet in
HERESY are the androgynous Newsys.
They report morning through night on
how to be perpetually afraid: “Rape is
spanking taken to extremes. X-TRA!
Rape is insertions of legs in between.
X-TRA!” Next come Fragrant
Nymphs, head and torso beneath
sheer, pastel cloth, with rubber gloves
and sponges, climbing through the
audience: friendly ghosts; janitors;
diseases; childhood flashbacks. They
sing: “One more, Tu mor. Who for?
Go away!”
Z.O.T are rudimentary males with
small wolf tails. Jovial physical fools
carrying and climbing, falling and
bonking. The B-L-Ds are female in
essence. They are a mixture of witch
and siren, bag ladies and prostitutes:
“Let’s make jam inside our cunts.
Berry! Berry! All make merry.”
Ma’iM lives eight feet above the
stage on a small platform with a large
rope which she can swing on. Little
horns like Moses. She is the Fool/
Child of the Tarot. She’s been around
for lifetimes and centuries.
ProP is the one in the background.
He carries a lit globe on one hand, a
larger one on his head. Never speaks.
Like the moon, caressive and reflected,
always soft, moving through phases.
Amneblume (omni plus l’ame) is
Catholic girl who believes Christ and
sex are synonymous. She wants to
take the cross and “slide my thighs up
and down it; put big end inside. Yes
...yes.”
Blum (Bloom) is German male
Jew who understands where there is
Law there is not enough Love; and
vice-versa. “You were taught to remember
what went before in order to
keep alive what used to be.” Blum
and AmneblQme eagerly explore each
other’s body, pretend sex, teeter-totter,
and do love dance while the son is
being hanged. Their relationship is
parallel to that of the daughter and
son.
HERESY is a ritual, group therapy,
for them who believe that beauty is
some thing over there. That intimacy
and passion live in the world of ideas,
and not in the flesh. HERESY is one-
half alarm clock, one-half bomb.
Wake up! Now’s the time.

----------------------

CREATING MOTION through intentiona
by Irene Dowd

In tro du c tio n
Over the years, I have had the
pleasure and challenge of working
with several thousand highly-skilled
movers: professional ballet and modern
dancers; classical, jazz and rock musicians;
athletes of all sorts, including a
woman who swam around Manhattan
and a man who ran across the USA.
In my role as their neuromuscular
trainer, I practice specialized movement
problem-solving.
For example, one dancer needed
subtle shifts in the way she moved her
neck while doing a pirouette (spin on
one foot), a pianist had to change the
way he used his fourth finger just
before it touched the key, the man
who ran across the country needed to
approach stretching his hamstrings in
an entirely new way. Before changing
their movements, these individuals
experienced pain or diminished quality
of performance.
In each case, there was a period of
time during our meetings when I put
my hands on the surface of the person’s
body and practiced intentional
touch: a highly specific and purposeful
movement communication between
myself and the human being whom I
am touching. During my touch interaction
with performers, they are likely
to ask, “What are you doing now?”
Sometimes there were no questions
until after the intentional touch interaction,
when the person was again practicing
pirouettes or running. Noting
better balance or faster running time,
he/she might ask, “What did you do?
It felt like you weren’t doing anything,
but somehow, now I feel completely
different.”
This article is a response to the
question of what I am doing physically
when I’m practicing intentional touch.
Touching, by its nature, is simultaneously
both a means of perception
and a means of action, although my
conscious attention may be focused
primarily on one or another at any one
time.
In Part I of this article, I will
focus on the directional movement I
perform/induce when I touch someone.
It may be apparent from my student’s
question that my action and/or movement
is often very subtle. Although
the touch interaction may continue for
some minutes, it may involve very
small movements in terms of space
and force exerted. If the reader
chooses to practice the explorations
described in Part I, he/she will discover
that tiny movements as well as
larger movements can be communicated
clearly to another person. I call
these movements which I convey
through my touch, “lines of movement,”
or “vectors of motion.”
In Part II of the article, I will
focus on the identification and understanding
of specific structures through
touch. I will describe how I identify
each structure of the body and locate
it functionally within a body system
such as the muscular or skeletal system.
I will also discuss some of the
ways in which I use my hands to
communicate kinesthetically with each
of the body systems. It is not within
the scope of this article to describe
how or on what basis I create the
specific movement choreography
which I convey through my intentional
touch to the various tissues. The
effort to do so would be too complex
and lengthy, since the choreography I
create is unique to each situation and
person.
Once I can identify the specific
structure with which I am communicating,
then the location, direction,
speed, timing, force, and phrasing of
the movement I convey can be exquisitely
refined. Through my movement,
I can gain understanding of the
current state of that structure, its immediate
movement preferences and
limitations, and its future movement
potential for easy and adaptive function.
As I “talk” with my hands, each
body system “tells” me more and
more about what we can do together.

PART I:
INDUCING MOVEMENT
To induce motion through touch,
there are two actions I can use: I can
“push,” or “send,” a vector of force
from my hand towards another person;
and I can “pull,” or “attract,” a vector
of force from that person towards
myself.
For example, I can place my hand
on the small of my companion’s back
to gently push him/her forward out a
door in front of us. This is an action
of “sending” through touch. Alternatively,
if I reach my hand around my
companion’s shoulder and pull him/her
towards me to make way for a third
party, this is an action of “attracting”
through touch.
The following activities are designed
to give touch practitioners
conscious control over these movements
as well as physical efficiency in
their performance. In this series of
explorations, you will practice:
A) Sending a vector of motion
from yourself to/through your
partner (so the directionality is
away from your hand).
B) Attracting a vector of motion
from/through your partner’s body
to yourself (so that the directionality
is towards your hand).
C) Alternating between sending
and attracting.
D) Using both hands simultaneously
in various combinations of
sending and attracting.

During these explorations, you will
not necessarily move your partner
through visible space. Instead, the
movement you communicate may produce
changes inside your partner’s
body which both of you can perceive
kinesthetically though not visually.
A) Sending a vector of motion from
self to!through a partner.
Stand facing your partner’s side
with the palm of your hand on the
outside of your partner’s nearest arm.
Send a series of vectors of motion to
your partner with various temporal
dynamics. You might try thrusting
very quickly and suddenly (staccato
dynamics) or pushing smoothly and
continuously with minute increments
of force (legato dynamics).
While still facing your partner,
change your distance to him/her as you
practice sending. When you are close,
you can might send primarily with
your fingers and palm, which can exert
the greatest refinement of motor skill
and, relatively the least amount of
force. Now move further away, and
try sending with your forearm and
elbow as well, which affords you some
more force. With even more distance
from your partner, you can send a
vector of motion from your spine and
shoulder. This allows you to send
with the greatest amount of power and
the least amount of refined control. If
you exert power from your torso and
shoulder and fine skill from your
fingers simultaneously, then your
sending action can most fully convey
your movement intentions.
Experimentation will show you
which manner of sending is most
comfortable for you as well as most
effective in communicating motion to
your partner. If you are functioning in
a way that is very inefficient for your
own body, your partner will sense
your physical distress and will reflect
it by either trying to help or by resisting
your strivings.
B) Attracting a vector of motion
from!through your partner.
Maintaining the same position as
above relative to your partner, keeping
your whole palm in contact with the
surface of your partner’s arm, gently
grasp your partner’s arm between your
thumb and fingertips. Slowly pull
your partner’s arm towards you with
your hand. Step back from your partner,
lighten the pressure of your fingertips
as much as you can without
breaking the contact between you, and
again draw the arm towards your
chest.
Still with your entire palm touching
the surface of your partner’s arm,
visualize your palm as a parabolic disc
or magnet drawing a vector of motion
out of the ground under your partner’s
feet, up through your partner’s body,
out your partner’s arm, and into your
own hand. Now go even further, imagining
that the “magnet” is under the
soles of your feet instead of under the
skin of your palm, taking the vector of
motion you receive from your partner
into your own palm, inward through
your arm, through your torso and legs,
out the soles of your feet, and into the
ground.
C) Alternating between sending and
attracting.
In the same stance with the center
of your palm directly in contact with
the outside of your partner’s arm,
alternate between sending a subtle
vector of motion to your partner’s arm
and attracting a vector of motion from
your partner’s arm. Without telling
your partner which you are doing,
notice if the arm moves or shifts in
any way when you change from sending
to attracting or vice versa. Can
your partner tell if you are sending or
attracting? Try varying the force of
your exertion, the depth to which your
vector of motion penetrates, and your
temporal dynamics. Are any of these
variations more effective in communicating
movement to your partner?
Sometimes, your partner might be
compelled by the force of your touch
to move through space, or else resist
this by countering your motion with
their own force in order to maintain
their position in space (which, if sending,
you will experience as an increase
of pressure against your hand). It is
also possible to exert several different
forces with one hand on your partner,
in order to counterbalance, harmonize
or elaborate the movement you wish
to convey.
INTERMISSION
At this juncture, some sensitive
touchers may begin to feel slightly
disoriented, dizzy, or fuzzy-headed
from the intensity of focus they are
giving to the interface between their
hand and their partner. If you feel
this way, you can shift your practice
from touching your partner’s arm with
your palm to touching the soles of
your partner’s feet with the soles of
your own feet, as you both lie supine
(on your backs), feet to feet. Practice
using your feet as you have been
using your hands.
You might try this sequence: Send
with both feet to your partner, penetrating
all the way through their legs,
trunk, arms and out the top of their
head. Next, attract with both feet so
that you draw your partner down from
their head, trunk, legs and feet and
through your own feet, and onward
out through the top of your head.
Now send with one foot and attract
with the other. Alternate so that the
foot that was sending now attracts and
vice versa. Notice the effect of your
actions on the position and motion of
your partner’s lower spine and pelvis.
Now let your partner be the active
agent Allow your entire body to
respond to the motion imparted to
your feet.
D) Using both hands simultaneously
in various combinations of sending
and attracting.
In the following practices, you will
counterbalance the force exerted by
one of your hands with the force exerted
by your other hand. In this way,
you will be able to more directly produce
motion within the internal volumes
of your partner’s body as well as
to perceive these motions more clearly
as pressure changes against your
palms.
Ask your partner to lie on his/her
side, or to sit on a stool or backless
chair. Place your right palm on the
front of your partner’s chest and your
left palm opposite your right on your
partner’s back. Send a vector of motion
from your back (left) palm while
stabilizing the front of your partner’s
chest with your front (right) palm with
the intention of moving the back surface
of your partner’s chest towards
the stabilized front surface, i.e. compressing
the volume of your partner’s
chest from back to front slightly.
Next, by sending with the back palm
and attracting with the front palm,
move both back and front surfaces
through space so that the internal
volume of your partner’s chest is
preserved and the chest as a whole
moves forward.
Now reverse the role of each hand
(front hand sending and the back hand
stabilizing, then attracting) so as to
convey the intention first of compressing
the chest from front to back, and
then of moving the chest as a whole
backwards.
Practice sending with both hands at
the same time so that the chest compresses
inward to its center like a
balloon deflating. Attract with both
hands at the same time so that the
chest expands outward like a balloon
filling up.
Move your hands down from your
partner’s chest to his/her pelvis. Place
the palm of one of your hands on the
front of your partner’s pelvis (just
below the belly button and above
pubic bone) and the palm of your
other hand on the back of your partner’s
pelvis (over the top of the sacrum
and lower spine area). Practice
sending with each hand, first emphasizing
the back hand so that it conveys
a stronger vector of motion. You
might see the small of his/her back
move forward slightly. Next emphasize
the front hand so that it conveys a
stronger vector of motion. This may
produce a slight concavity of the abdomen
such that it moves backwards
towards your left hand.
In order to further explore the roles
that both hands working together can
play in reorganizing your partner’s
body or body parts, you might explore
these additional practices with your
partner in a standing position. Put one
hand on the back of your partner’s
thorax (upper body) and send his/her
thorax forward while simultaneously
putting your other hand on the front of
your partner’s lower abdomen to send
his/her pelvis back so that the diagonal
distance between your palms decreases,
approaching a vertical. Keeping
the same hand positions on the body,
attract these two volumes so that the
diagonal distance between your palms
increases. [Figure 1]
In the first case, your partner’s
spinal posture will probably shift to
one of greater erectness (flattening of
the sagittal spinal curves). In the
second case, when you are attracting
instead of sending, you might see your
partner assume a more slumped spinal
posture (exaggeration of the sagittal
spinal curves).
It is possible to use one hand to
perform one of the three functions of
“sending,” “attracting,” or “stabilizing”
while the other hand does another.
Sometimes it seems that one hand is
more easily able to perform one of
these functions while the other hand is
more easily able to perform another.
Usually we can and do perform at
least two of these functions together
when we use both hands simultaneously.
CODA
Before resuming your normal daily
life activities, it is useful to “reground”
yourself by: walking around
while focusing on the sensation of the
soles of your feet on the ground;
massaging your feet; lying on your
back with the soles of your feet flat
on the ground and sliding the surface
of your soles around in circles or
figure 8’s; walking around again,
concentrating on the interaction between
the soles of your feet and the
ground.

PART II:
IDENTIFYING
Once you have acquired skill in
touching with precise directional intent,
you can practice touching as a
means to identify and interact with the
individual structures contained within
the body.
Traditionally, each identifiable
structure in the body is considered in
terms of its role in one of the many
functional systems including : cutaneous
(skin), fascial (connective tissue),
muscular, skeletal, circulatory (arteries,
veins, lymphatic vessels and
nodes, cerebrospinal fluid), nervous
(brain, spinal cord and nerves), and
visceral (glands and organs).
The skill necessary to identify a
particular structure develops out of an
interaction between extensive knowledge
of functional anatomy/physiol-
ogy/pathology and the subjective experience
of touching the various structures
of the body on many different
people over time. This long-term
practice gives a precise dimensional
concept of the contents of the entire
body as well as an understanding of
the variations in conditions that can
exist within these contents. Eventually
the intentional toucher begins to
find ways to communicate specific
movements which enhance the functional
potential of the various body
contents. I like to imagine that movements
conveyed through touch reveal
pathways or maps leading to the fulfillment
of the integrity, dreams and
desires of the various body tissues.
This section is a brief review of
the characteristic properties of each
systemic structure as I experience
them, and of how I perceive, identify,
and begin interacting with each structure
through touch. I think of each
body system as having its own “language,”
a unique spatial, temporal, and
energetic configuration by which I
both recognize it and “listen” to it so
as to learn what to do next.
The features that I must notice in
order to identify both the system and
the specific stucture within that system
include the following:
location
size
shape
temperature
density or apparent hardness
range and direction of motion
rhythm and speed
connections to or effects on other
structures
nature of the response to my
touch
SKIN/FASCIA
Our skin is the largest organ of
our body, serving the essential roles of
both separating and connecting our
inner and outer worlds. The exploration
of skin is a form of topography,
the study of surfaces. Our skin is
highly innervated, therefore extremely
responsive to touch. Some of the skin
receptors trigger responses in the deeper
layers of our body, such as underlying
muscles and even organs. (In fact,
this works both ways, in that an unusual
sensation in the skin is sometimes
being referred from a deeper
structure.)
Fascia can be easily thought of as
the skin for the internal body structures.
However, this characterization
does not suggest the awesome prevalence
of fascia in the body. Not only
is every structure in the body encased
in fascia; in addition, fascia separates
and connects each structure of the
body from and to every other, making
its surfaces many-layered and extremely
complex.
If you ever wondered what it is
that connects and pulls from your big
toe to your ear when you do an extravagant
full-body stretch, the answer
is: fascia. The fascia which forms a
full-body stocking just under our skin
is our superficial fascia (especially
thick in our low back and outer thigh
regions). There are multiple layers
beneath that, all the way to the fascia
which surrounds our body core, i.e.,
our spinal cord and brain. This deepest
layer, since it protects our nervous
system, is quite tough, aptly earning
the name of dura.
In working with fascia, we can
continue to use our topography model
but we must think of many surfaces
layered on top of each other (like mille
feuille pastry or the layers of rock and
sand that form the earth’s crust).
* Like skin, fascia is elastic but it is
not as soft. Each layer of fascia has
its own directional pull along which it
will stretch more or less easily, not
unlike woven fabric. Since it surrounds
muscle, stretching a muscle
also stretches fascia. However, muscle
is “smart”—it has innervation to permit
it to actively and intentionally
contract or not. Fascia, in contrast, is
“dumb”—it has no motor innervation
—therefore, the length and surface
shape of fascia can only be altered
passively through movement imposed
from the outside.
One can think of the ubiquitous
fascia as the historical record of the
body since its present condition reflects
movement and positions that
have been assumed by the surrounding
structures in the past. For example,
long term shortening in the erectae
spinae muscles of the lower back will
result in a shortening of the surrounding
fascia. Subsequently, a sway-back
posture is maintained even after the
supporting lower back muscles are
relaxed. Thus, it may not be enough
to relax and lengthen a muscle that is
too short. It may be necessary to
lengthen the fascia as well in order for
the muscle to be fully extensible.
David was an individual who exhibited
this bodily configuration. He
complained of fatigue or aching at the
end of the day, while his wife complained,
“his gut hangs out in front.”
David frequently attempted to stretch
out his erectae spinae muscles with an
exercise he learned from a gym class.
When I asked him to show me the
exercise, he slightly bent his knees
and curved forward as far as he could,
trying to let his fingertips touch the
ground. He bounced vigorously in an
effort to reach closer to the ground.
This practice does, in fact, stretch (and
activate) the erectae spinae slightly,
but it did not diminish his sway back
or his ache. In order to change his
spinal posture and sustain greater
length of his erectae spinae muscles, I
taught him another practice which
elongates the lumbar fascia as well.
The lumbar fascia stretches “on
the bias” from its anchorage on the
spine where it travels around to the
belly, connecting the rib cage and the
pelvis. [Figure 2] In order to elongate
his lumbar fascia, I asked David
to lie on his side and twist his pelvis
forward by reaching his upper thigh
out along the floor in front of him and
counter-twist his rib cage backwards
by reaching his upper arm out along
the floor behind him. After staying in
this position for a minute or two with
my manual assistance, he reversed the
position of his thigh and arm so that
his pelvis twisted backwards with the
reach of his upper thigh along the
floor behind him and his rib cage
counter-twisted forwards with the
reach of his upper arm along the floor
in front of him.
After resting in this position for a
minute or two, he began to slowly
swing his arm and leg in opposition,
from the first to the second position.
At my encouragement, he gradually
increased his speed and his range of
motion. Finally, he repeated the
whole sequence lying on the other
side. When he stood up five minutes
later, his back appeared straighter, his
“gut” was less prominent, and he
claimed that the ache was gone and
replaced with a feeling of “lightness.”
When he tried his original forwardhanging
position again, without bouncing,
his fingers touched the ground
easily.
MUSCLE
Our muscles, encased and surrounded
by fascia, are the “engines”
responsible for producing the movement
of our bony levers through
space. If the exploration of the skin
and fascia is analogous to the topography
of the earth, then the exploration
of the muscles is analogous to geology-
Muscles have depth and volume as
well as surface. As mentioned before,
a highly significant difference between
muscle and fascia is that muscle is
“smart,” i.e., it is innervated by motor
nerves. This means we can voluntarily
direct the activity of a muscle and
therefore affect its shape. Because it
is smart, muscle can be altered by the
application of voluntary thinking/im-
agery. I usually use spoken imagery
as I am applying manual techniques to
individual muscles and muscle groups.
It is quite easy to alter an individual
muscle by working linearly along
its surface. If you can locate and
touch the points of attachment of a
particular muscle to the bone, then you
can elicit voluntary elongation and
relaxation of the muscle by asking the
person to imagine those two points
moving apart so that the distance
between the points increases. To
facilitate the person’s imagining (and
elicit an additional reflexive or unconscious
response in his/her muscle),
press directly on the tendons close to
their points of attachment to bone and
gently pull the two polar points apart.
[Figure 3]
Conversely, if the person will
imagine that those same two points are
moving towards each other so that the
distance between the points decreases,
he/she can voluntarily shorten and
increase the level of activity of that
muscle. The toucher can also facilitate
this activity in the muscle reflexively
by tapping/vibrating the muscle belly
quickly or using a fingernail to stroke
against the direction of hair growth on
the skin overlying the muscle.
Through touch, we can penetrate to
the different layers of muscle. Each
muscle forms one layer and has a
different direction of action.
For example, if I am touching the
most superficial layer of the abdominal
muscles—the external oblique—on the
right side, then the direction of action
is from the lateral aspect of the ribs to
the medial aspect of the anterior pelvis
(pubic region). [Figure 5] I can
change the activity of this muscle in a
few ways: by bringing the two points
together, resulting in contraction or
shortening; by sending the two points
apart, resulting in relaxation or lengthening;
or by crossing perpendicular to
the line of the muscle, resulting in
neutralizing any activity of that muscle.
If I choose to penetrate this layer
and go one layer deeper—the internal
oblique—on the right side, then the
direction of action is from the more
medial aspect of the ribs to the lateral
aspect of the anterior pelvis, in other
words, perpendicular to the superficial
layer.
If I go onward to the deepest layer—the
transversus abdominis—on the
right side, then the direction of action
is from the back around to the front in
the direction of an elastic belt. It is
possible to stretch out the belt, relaxing
or elongating the muscle; or else to
tighten that belt, activating or shortening
the muscle.
Once you know the location and
orientation of each muscle relative to
the others, you can penetrate to any
layer with your touch, using the directions
that have an influence at that
layer. It is useful to note that these
three layers of the abdominal wall
muscles are attached indirectly to the
spine by the lumbar fascia (which I
described in the case of David).

It is also possible to work volu-
metrically with any muscle. In other
words, I can consider alterations in the
thickness of a muscle. By focusing on
changes in volume, I can alter the ten-
sion/exertion levels in the muscle, just
as I altered the length of muscle when
I focused on linear changes. For example,
if I touch with the intention of
thickening a particular muscle layer,
the contractile activity of that muscle
will tend to increase. If I touch with
the intention of decreasing the volume
of a particular muscle layer under my
fingers, there will tend to be a decrease
in the contractile activity of that
muscle or an enhancement of its ability
to elongate to its maximum length.

BONE/JOINT
Our bones are levers whose relative
stiffness allow us to carry the
mass of our body directionally through
space. All bones are spiral in form.
It is in the joints between the bones
where the actual movement takes
place. The joint surfaces are always
rounded (concave or convex). Therefore,
movement at any joint describes
an arc through space. There are no
straight lines in this realm. We are
working with curved joint surfaces and
spherical space through which the
spiral-shaped bones arc.
When we touch to produce movement
of bones, we are actually producing
movement at joints, regardless
of where the touch or imagery is
focused. For this reason, my focus is
generally on joint movement (although
we may think of the bones themselves
in order to produce movement at their
joints).
When we produce movement at
joints, we are affecting a whole group
of muscles. Some muscles are shortening
to produce the joint motion;
some are elongating to permit the joint
motion to happen unimpeded; still
others are contracting in place to
stabilize the bones. Even a tiny joint
movement produces a very extensive
and complex muscular response. If
working with skin is topography and
working with muscle is geology, then
working with bones is internal astronomy:
the study of the orbits in a miniature
solar system.
A common condition (called hallux
valgus), in which the big toe is
angled inward so as to point towards
the second toe instead of straight
ahead, serves as a case in which the
“orbits” of the foot are disharmonious.
[Figure 6] In an ideal foot, the toes
each rotate vertically around their
bases (the metatarsal-phalangeal joints)
in smooth arcs of motion which are
approximately the range of half a full
orbit (135 to 180 degrees). This allows
each toe to raise up off the
ground to point towards the sky (extension)
and to press down and grip
the ground (flexion).
There is a second dimension of
motion of the toes as well. This is an
arc which allows each toe to angle
away from the midline of the foot
(second toe) so that the toes are
splayed wide on the ground (abduction)
and then to angle towards the
midline of the foot so that the toes are
all pressed together (adduction). This
arc of motion is less than a tenth of a
full orbit (20 to 30 degrees) but it
nonetheless allows the foot the ability
to significantly widen and narrow. By
engaging both orbits of motion, each
toe can circumduct around its base in
a way which allows us to stabilize or
grasp with our foot.
Let us consider the hallux valgus.
In watching a dancer named Margaret,
who exhibits this configuration, move
her big toe, I see that the arc of motion
of the tip of her toe is deflected
from its path and diminished in its
range. Instead of moving straight up
towards the ceiling in line with the
bone that forms its base (the metatarsal
bone), the big toe meanders inward
towards the second toe even more, so
that it never actually points to the
ceiling. Likewise, if the big toe is
pressed down onto the ground or
curled under as if to grip a sandy
beach surface, it angles inward so that
its motion is stopped by its collision
with the second toe.
When I feel the motions of her big
toe with my fingers, I will perceive
the meandering and restricted nature
of the joint motion. I particularly feel
the lack of space on the inner aspect
of the big toe joint next to the second
toe (medial aspect of the first MP
joint). With my fingers I can gently
create a little more room in that part
of the joint, so that the big toe will
begin to approach its ideal orbit.
When I ask the dancer to engage the
muscle (abductor hallucis) on the
outside of the big toe joint by imagining
the outer tip of the big toe moving
towards the inside of her heel bone
(imagining shortening the distance
between the two points of attachment
of the muscle so as to increase its
activity), I may see and feel some
changes in the joint motion.
I might also ask the dancer to
imagine the inner tip of the big toe
moving away from the foot so as to
make the big toe grow very long from
that point (this decreases the engagement
of the flexor hallucis brevis and
lumbricals which tend to pull the big
toe into a more angulated position
when it is flexed or extended). In
these small interactions with the big
toe joint and its surrounding muscles, I
might see some shifting of the big
toe’s position at rest as well as a more
fluid orbit of motion. This shift may
be sustained by Margaret if she continues
practicing it attentively as she goes
through her daily activities.
FLUID SYSTEMS:
blood, lymph, cerebrospinal fluid
One can describe the movement
characteristics of skin, fascia, muscles
and bones primarily in terms of their
spatial qualities: e.g., their changes in
size, shape, direction, arcs of movement,
etc. While focusing on the
movement of the fluid systems of the
body, however, it becomes essential to
attend to the temporal aspects of the
movement as well.
As I “listen” to the flow patterns
of these fluids, I can describe them
with metaphors. The pattern of flow
through the blood vessels is like the
progression of water down a river with
a pump at one end. In contrast, lymph
flows viscously and irregularly (at the
impetus of an outside force such as
musculo-skeletal action), much like the
colloidal suspension of sand and water
that forms the muddy bed of a swamp.
Slower yet is cerebrospinal fluid
whose tides, like those of an inland
sea, ebb and flow on an enclosing
shore. All these fluid systems can be
studied in terms of the complex and
elegant physics of fluid dynamics.
BLOOD VESSELS. Blood is the
easiest fluid to monitor. You can
directly feel the pulse of arterial flow
by touching the front of your own
wrist, for example. Or if you lie
quietly for a few moments, you can
feel your arterial pulse in all your
extremities.
Arterial blood is pumped rhythmically
by the heart through the arteries
whose strongly-binding elasticity does
not allow the heart’s pulse to diffuse.
Venous blood is pumped back through
the thinner-walled veins by movement
produced by the alternate contraction/
relaxation of muscles and concomitant
motion of joints.
Arteries are firmer than veins.
They are easily felt to have the characteristic
rhythmic pulse impelled by
the heartbeat. Veins are more malleable,
and their motion is a function of
many forces acting upon them to
propel the returning blood through the
one-way valves back to the heart.
These forces include the elastic properties
of the veins themselves, the
elastic quality of the surrounding
tissues, the activity of the surrounding
muscles, and even the elastic properties
of clothing and other externals,
such as gravity or the touch of another’s
hands.

LYMPH flow is from periphery to
center, in the same direction as venous
flow. It filters and returns to the heart
cellular fluids not carried by the veins,
with the addition of dead white cells
and other immune system sentinels,
fighters and martyrs. It is not pumped
by the hearjt but is instead propelled
by the action of the muscles and organs
around it. Since its main, central,
deep-level channel travels along
the front of the thoracic spine, the
pumping produced by breathing is
itself a prime mover of lymph in its
final progression back to the heart.
Lymphatic flow is uneven. Its viscosity,
speed, and rhythm are determined
by the state of the immune system,
cellular health, breathing and the level
of the body’s physical activity at the
moment.
The superficial lymphatic vessels
have nodes at the joints: very large
ones at armpit, base of neck and groin
areas, moderately large ones at elbows,
knees, wrists and ankles. These
are quite easy to palpate (feel with
your hands) when there is a local
infection such as a mosquito bite.
Even in the absence of any congestion,
it is easy to palpate the relatively large
lymph nodes at the groin in front of
the hip.
Where blood may be perceived as
moving quickly, lymph is slower, even
sluggish. Where blood is more watery,
lymph is more like mud. Where
arterial blood flow is clearly metered,
lymph movement is not metered at all.
Where blood seems to have a mind of
its own, lymph is mindless. Where
blood is like a pulsing river, lymph
can be like a peat bog.
We have all experienced the effects
of venous and lymphatic pooling
due to a sluggish return to the heart,
perhaps when sitting for a long car
trip or in bleachers at an athletic
event. When we finally stand up, our
feet feel hot and thick. When we take
off our shoes, our feet may appear red
or mottled and the tops of our shoes
are marked deeply into our skin. The
the red may be indicative of blood
pooling while the puffy swelling may
be indicative of the lymphatic pooling.
Elevation of our feet coupled with
active circling of our ankles may
quickly alter both the color and size of
our feet to a more familiar state.
A more extremely uncomfortable
situation arises when we sit with one
foot folded under us during that long
car trip or athletic event. Then we
have not only compromised fluid
return to the heart, but also arterial
outflow from the heart and nerve
signals to the foot as a result of pressure.
In this case, an examination of
the foot will reveal a cooler and whiter
form which experiences no sensation
at all for a few moments. Vigorous
encouragement of arterial flow
and nerve signals to the foot (by, for
example, hopping up and down on that
foot) will produce the most intense
and miserable of sensations. A more
gradual encouragement of outflow
(such as very light repetitive stroking
of the foot from ankle to toes and
making tiny movements of the foot)
will produce somewhat less intense
sensations of “pin-pricks” or “fire
ants” as more normal flow is being reestablished.

CEREBROSPINAL FLUID is the liquid
medium in which the brain and spinal
cord are bathed. This fluid is encased
in three layers of a type of connective
tissue called dura mater, arachnoid
dura, and pia mater. The dural sacs
are themselves encased in the bones of
the skull and the vertebrae of the spinal
column. Thus, the central nervous
system is protected by flotation inside
a shock-absorbing fluid medium as
well as by armament within the adjustable
hard plates of cranial and spinal
bones. The dural sac, which encases
the cerebrospinal fluid, attaches at
various key points to the skull and
spinal column and is itself continuous
with the deep fascia of the rest of the
body.
Although we cannot directly touch
the cerebrospinal fluid itself, we can
directly monitor its motion by placing
our hands on the bones that its dural
sac attaches to—the skull and vertebrae.
The reverberations of that motion
can also be monitored from any
place in the body—even the feet—because
of the continuity of dura and
fascia throughout the body.
In the absence of unusual influences
(abnormal neural, biochemical, or
musculo-skeletal conditions), the cerebrospinal
fluid seems to move rhythmically
and periodically. As suggested
before, we can liken the cerebrospinal
fluid rhythm to the tidal flow patterns
of an inland sea. “Storms at sea”
are eventually perceivable at any point
along its enclosing shoreline. In attending
to the cerebrospinal fluid, we
are focusing on rhythms of motion
through time. We may also attend to
harmony or dissynchrony in these
rhythms of motion when we compare
right and left sides of the body, upper
and lower regions, central and distal
parts, etc.
Suppose that I were to arrive for a
visit later the same day with the unfortunate
person who sat for a long time
on her foot. I might ask her to lie
down on her back to allow me to hold
the outsides of her lower legs and feet
in my hands. If I waited quietly for
several minutes with my fingers and
palms touching her ever so lightly, I
would be able to identify the foot that
she had been sitting on by its diminished
cranial rhythm—i.e., impeded
resonance within the ebb and flow of
the cerebrospinal fluid. My hands
would feel that the outer ankle bones
(fibulae) would be minutely rotating
forward and backwards relative to the
shin bone (tibia). [Figure 7] This
minimal arcing of the fibula around
the tibia would take place in a very
slow pendulum-like rhythm (slower
than a full breath cycle of inhalation
and exhalation). On the sat-upon right
foot, I would feel a diminished range
of motion in the fibula’s orbit and
perhaps even a slower rhythm to that
motion. The fibula would travel a
shorter distance and take a longer
amount of time to do so.
The difference in the two sides
would be subtle but palpable, possibly
for many hours after the mildly traumatic
sitting event
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The movement of signals along
nerves is so rapid as to seem instantaneous.
This gives us the satisfying
illusion that our brain and any particular
cell in the periphery (say, a muscle
cell in the index finger) are in simultaneous
synchrony. In fact, studies have
shown that they’re not. Approximately
.3 seconds will pass between the
time our eye sees a flash of flight and
our brain sends an impulse to our
finger to move so that it presses a
button.
Unless a nerve is severely inflamed
(as in sciatica), we normally
don’t feel the nerve itself, but only the
result of its transmissions: we feel
sensations such as temperature, pressure,
pain, and itch due to transmissions
from the periphery to the spinal
cord/brain; we produce movements of
our bones through space due to transmissions
to the muscles from the
spinal cord/brain.
While nerves transmit impulses via
electric currents, these currents are
themselves affected and altered in
terms of intensity, speed, duration, and
spatial pathways by the continuous
changes in production by the brain of
specialized chemicals called neuro-
transmitters. The relative concentration
of these chemicals at any given
site within the nervous system at a
particular moment is contingent on
such factors as previous experience
(i.e., learning), level of alertness,
fatigue, overall health, emotional and
hormonal states, as well as the amount
and type of stimulus being received by
the brain at that moment.
Even the simplest neurological
response involves millions of nerve
synapses (connections between nerves
across which impulses are transmitted).
Any action can be thought of as
a vast orchestral performance or temporal-spatial
web of interactions within
the nervous system. There are many
different instruments in the orchestra
and each one plays its score of varying
tones in various sequences through
time, but the music is the summation
of all the instruments together.
The web of interactions within the
nervous system is incredibly elaborate
even when we are performing the
simplest motion. When I think of
interacting with the nervous system, I
like to imagine that I am listening to a
symphony. The brain of the person I
am touching is the conductor of the
neural symphony. As audience, I can
be observant, appreciative, and critical.
If the person I am working with, the
conductor (Til call her Sonia), is interested
in changing or enhancing the
“symphony,” she will have to become
consciously aware of what my hands,
as audience, are conveying. If I have
gained Sonia’s attention, then a few
words coupled with the most minimal
spatial and temporal directions from
my fingers can have a significant
effect on her entire nervous system.
For example, Sonia suffers from a
degenerative neurological syndrome
which causes the left side of her body
to be weaker and less sensitive than
her right. The difference in her two
sides is not constant. Sometimes she
will experience almost equal sensorimotor
innervation to both sides. Other
times she will be severely debilitated
for months on end.
One day at the swimming pool,
she asked me to observe her crawl
stroke. She was going through a
period of marked debility in which
swimming was the only activity she
could enjoy. However, she noticed
that she had difficulty staying in her
lane and was constantly bumping into
the rope to her left side. What I saw
was that her right arm always reached
forward more strongly and with more
sustainment while her left arm seemed
to merely follow through. I told her
what I was seeing with the comment
that I suspected this to be a result of
her neurological disability. To my
surprise, she expressed surprise at my
observation. She told me, “I feel as if
I use both arms equally when I swim.”
In response, I suggested that we try
an experiment. I asked her to imagine
that her left arm had to move through
something denser and more resistant
than water. As I said this, I lightly
resisted the movement of her left palm
forward through space with my own
hand, as if my hand were the water.
She followed my suggestion during her
next lap and immediately exhibited a
more symmetrical stroke. When she
arrived at the end of the lane, she
exuberantly announced that she hadn’t
run into the rope even once. She said,
“Now I feel like I’m doing everything
with my left arm, and it feels good.”
We continued to swim at the pool
every day for the rest of the summer.
Now that she was giving more of her
attention to her left arm, she was able
to swim in a more symmetrical fashion.
The sensory loss induced by her
neurological condition had allowed her
to “forget” her left arm and therefore
to not use it even as much as she was
able. Although her medical condition
was unchanged, she was able to engage
her brain to give more stimulus
to her left arm and thereby more integrated
function to her whole body.

ORGAN AND GLANDULAR
SYSTEMS
Organic function can best be understood
with a detailed awareness of
spatial location, tissue texture, temporal
dynamics, and the complex interactions
between each organ/gland and
another.
Glands are characterized by their
ability to secrete a substance which
can be carried (usually via the circulatory
system) to other locations in the
body. Organs are characterized by
their specialized ability to carry out a
function which alters or processes
substances which pass through them.
Any variation in the amount and/or
type of secretion produced by a particular
gland can have effects on each
and all the other body systems in
elaborate ways. Any shift in the processing
capacities of a particular organ
can likewise result in adjustments and
changes within all the other body
systems.
Increased activity in one organ/
gland can produce decrease in its
antagonist organ/gland, and vice versa.
Thus, it is not desirable to simply
stimulate what is “underactive” or
soothe what is “overactive.” Because
of these complex interactions, I let the
glands/organs “tell” me about themselves,
but I do not “talk back” or
intervene except to remove external
impediments to their balanced functioning
(such as tight clothing, muscle
tension, joint rigidity, etc.).
Generally speaking, a healthy
gland/organ feels soft, movable, and
not easily distinguished from surrounding
soft tissue. For example, a
healthy thyroid gland (snuggled
around the “adam’s apple” or thyroid
cartilage) can barely be palpated when
it moves up and down along with the
adam’s apple in swallowing. It is
usually like a soft padding to either
side of the cartilage. However, when
it is inflamed (as in thyroiditis) it will
be hot and the overlying skin will be
red. When it is enlarged (with goitre)
it is visible as a large bulging mass
filling the space between the chin and
the sternum. It may even have a
grainy texture like tapioca if it has
nodules growing in it.
When I am working with someone,
an organ or gland may “call out” to
me strongly by resisting my motion,
for example. My hands can then respond
by: (1) identifying the specific
visceral “shouter”; (2) removing impediments
to its full function—i.e.,
release surrounding muscle spasm, reduce
rigidity, stasis, pressure, interrupt
pain when possible, etc.; (3) balanc-
ing/integrating the body system as a
whole to support integrated function.
Although my actions do not directly
make an infirm organ or gland resume
its normal functions and secretions,
my hands might inform a healthy
organ or gland about conditions of
greater ease and mobility.
Summary
I sense skin and fascia as surface
—topography. I perceive muscle as
surface and volume—geology. Skeletal
joints are characterized by orbital
movement—astronomy. The fluid
systems of blood/lymph/cerebrospinal
fluid are identified by the rate and
rhythm of their directional linear
flow—fluid dynamics. I can only
begin to comprehend the complex
patterns of the nervous system if I
think orchestrally. The glandular/
organ systems are perceivable in complex
patterns over long diurnal cycles
and biorhythms which I must run at
fast-forward through my memory in
order to gain a sense of them.
The kinds of things that I “hear”
skin and fascia telling me about are
elasticity and extensibility (or restriction).
Muscle tells me about extensibility
as well as contractility. Joints
inform me about their surrounding
muscles and also about their intrinsic
mobility (or stiffness). Fluid systems
talk about rhythm (or arrhythmia),
speed, dilation (or constriction) of the
vessels which carry the fluids, viscosity
and congestion. The nervous system
tells me about communication
channels, synthesis and webs of functional
control. The glandular and organ
systems talk about resilience (or hardness),
adaptability, long-term complex
interactions.
To perceive each system, I find it
useful to “talk” to it by sending/attrac-
ting vectors of motion to, from and
around it The movement I convey
through my hands initiates a kind of
kinesthetic conversation with the various
tissues of the person I am touching.
As I move responsively, always
sending and attracting, I begin to
understand what a particular group of
cells is “telling” me. Eventually, I
choreograph more complex and
lengthy sequences of motion with my
fingers in interaction with those cells
to present new possibilities for movement
interactions with other structures.
If I send with one hand on either
side of the pelvis, I can identify and
interact with all the body systems
which compose that volume contained
between my hands. My front hand
might be sending the psoas muscles
away to relax against the front of the
spine, thus allowing the kidneys and
intestines to fall backwards into the
abdominal cavity so that the surface of
the abdominal wall becomes more
convex under my hand.
Meanwhile my back hand can be
sending the lumbar vertebrae forward
so that each intervertebral joint moves
into a position of greater extension.
This will increase the height of the
intervertebral discs, thus decompressing
them while opening the spaces
through which the nerve roots pass in
and out of the spinal column to communicate
with the lower limbs. My
back hand could also be sending the
erectae spinae muscles forward to
relax against the back of the spine. If
I lower my back hand slightly so that
it is resting on the sacrum, I might
gently add to the ebb and flow of the
cerebrospinal fluid (whose rhythm
reverberates all the way down to the
feet).
If I choose to simultaneously send
with both hands so that they not only
move towards each other but also
slightly upwards towards the person’s
head, I might affect other fluid systems
such as the lymphatic trunk
which carries the lymph from the front
of the hip joints to the heart. If I keep
sending with both hands with increasing
pressure as the person exhales,
I will force the abdominal contents
upwards against the diaphragm,
causing it to dome up as far as possible
into the thorax. This will allow
the lungs to expel more air, increasing
their usable volume. I can induce
movement in each body system contained
between my hands by varying
the location, pressure, force, timing
and depth of my touch while sending.
[Figure 8] The motion induced can
be elaborated even more if I combine
sending and attracting touch.
Generally, I perceive a system to
be at ease when there is vitality, rhythmic
movement and harmony. I perceive
a system to be under duress
when it resists movement, is distinctly
hot/cold, rapid/slow, arrhythmic or
utterly still. In other words, if a particular
structure is yelling or singing
dissonantly, then I pay very careful
attention to what it has to say. If I
can understand it, then I can “sing
back” with my hands through the
basic actions of sending and attracting
as an informed intentional toucher.
Including verbal communication further
clarifies and facilitates the touch
interaction.
Through intentional touch, I hope
to engage all of the body systems of
the person I am touching so the parts
can perceive mutually harmonious
ways of moving, and the person can
achieve greater freedom to function
adaptively throughout life.

----------------------

STILL MOVING Dialogue 

by David Koteen, Karen Nelson, Heitzo

DEAR EDS,
As I move through the burning of
my own life, among fiery residue, are
forgiveness and compassion. It’s parallel,
or simultaneous, how when for
others you are, so too, for your Self,
you are. Compassionate and forgiving.
Vividly I recall the incident at Breit-
enbush ’93 when a massage person
allegedly violated a client “...in an
unwanted sexual manner at the end of a
massage” (Karen Nelson in Still Moving
last issue). “Allegedly,” because his
version of the incident was not heard, as
he was excluded from the Contact Community
meeting the following day where
I felt he was accused, tried, judged and
sentenced. Many were screaming and
stomping and banging the walls and
crying and vehemently venting hostility.
Lots of judgment; not much forgiveness.
Lots of anger; not much compassion.
Even for the massage client. This
incident truly has the feeling of “the real
world.” The culture is strong on abuse
and catharsis and violence. You can
alleviate your own guilt by burning the
witch. She is the One keeping God
from You.
The American ethos, educational
system, and media are rife with incidents
(50% of all tax dollars still goes
to fund the military). Is there not some
thing(s) other underneath the concepts
of Defense and Abuse, Good Guys, Bad
Guys, Them or Us, Shes and Hes? Or
is this relentless, cultural gravity? It is
historically massive, with such great
momentum, and clear-cuttingly out of
control. What to do? How to shift,
alter, undermine—some way—to change
It. And create space for different values—gentler,
forgiving, supportive,
compassionate—to emerge, and take
root
Towards this end I wrote the performance
HERESY. [See “From Where
Are You Casting, Your Light” in this
issue.]

David Koteen

REFLECTIONS ON ORGANIZING
A JAM
When making organizational decisions
on your feet which endeavor to
include everyone’s best interest, during
the crux of a crisis, one reaches for at
least some foothold of logic upon which
ensuing decisions will be made.
With the luxury of time to dwell in
retrospect upon one’s unchangeable
decisions and the resulting incidents,
one tends to see other possibilities and
choices one could make.
Given Che opportunity again to
confront my development as a decisionmaking
organizer, I venture that my
actions would differ from those I made
at Breitenbush ’93.
From the perspective of now, I offer
this:
Jain Organizer’s Sanity Clause
We invite people to come to
practice the discipline of dance and,
while people bring their own personal
opinions through which they
view the world (real or otherwise),
we agree to agree that we are here
to dance. We should also agree
that we can potentially disagree
about everything else, and act with
that in mind. Hopefully, each person
realizes the intent and extent of
the situation and willingly engages
themselves.
Karen Nelson
Vashon. WA


COMMENTS ON ETIQUETTE
In Atlanta, Georgia, we have had
regular jams for a couple of years with
occasional jams, classes and workshops
going back to the late 1970s. When
another c.i.’er comes through Atlanta
we often schedule a special jam to have
the opportunity to dance with this visitor.
We usually ask the new dancer to
share their background/techniques/medi-
tations with us, as we share ours with
them. I like this mechanism. I feel that
it honors both the visitor and the host
contact improv community.
When my wife and I travel we
always look for jams. We enjoy experiencing
different ways of approaching
contact improv. I’ve taught many contact
improv workshops and classes but
I don’t go into someone else’s community
saying, “I am a teacher, I want to
teach a contact improv class.” Instead
I say, “I jam, can I jam with your community?”
I think of this as good etiquette.
The joy of contact improvisation is
sharing movement. One dancer does
not manhandle another. There is an
intense interaction in contact improvisation
that includes trust, giving
weight, lifting, etc. The cornerstone of
this interaction is a dialogue between
two individuals who acknowledge the
right of the other to be and move. I
smile when the social context that surrounds
jams and the flow of dancers
through the community reflects this
principal. I invite dialogue.
Heitzo
Atlanta, GA

--------------------

Sex Talk
by lori b.

harbin is such an amazing experience—so
many people in so little space,
i am told that warmer weather makes a
very different jam. winter means cold,
wet tenting, sleeping in a big room with
many other bodies, or spending big
money on private rooms, i am with my
lover and we are into multiplicity—two
public nights in the big room, three
nights of private, wet, tenting and one
night in a hotel-like Harbin Hot Springs
room.
i have agreed to facilitate a discussion
about sex and contact improvisation
with julie oak. we are both very tired
but know it’s important to provide space
for such a talk, i want activity, something
experiential which will start people
in body and in immediacy, i am
curious about boundaries—what they
are, how we recognize them, how our
dancing alters them, how dancing
boundaries differ from social boundaries
or sexual boundaries.
i ask the assembled group to form
two lines, one on each side of the room,
facing each other, we will do a boundary
walk, each person has a partner
directly across from them, they make
eye contact, one line is still while the
other line slowly comes across the
space, the moment a still person feels a
shift, of any kind, they ask the mover to
stop, this is very primary—about sensing
boundary and identifying changes,
initially, the still person uses hand signals
to stop the mover, then i encourage
people to use their voices, it is very
strong to hear people say the word
“stop.” we do this boundary walk in
the main space and then we move to
someplace more private.
about 25 of us squeeze into a tiny
room called The Guru Room, a place
for massages, private time, special projects.
a suggestion is made that we
begin by formulating questions, then we
follow whatever issue seems hottest,
ultimately, i am sorry that we took this
tack, the very activity of formulating
seems to squeeze the life out of almost
anything, right away, we step back
from whatever edge we might have been
on. nobody realized at the time that
this decision might be dulling, the
group was large, our time was limited
(1.5 hours) and we might have gotten
badly bogged down without some structure,
but i wonder if our immediate
need for structure arose out of fear.
here are the questions that were
formulated and some of the comments
which were offered during open discussion:
• what is the difference between sensuality
and sexuality? what is arousal?
• as the community grows, are our
sexual boundaries expanding?
• how should our community handle
accusations of sexual impropriety?
• how should our community deal with
charged emotions around sexuality?
• if you get a crush on someone, do you
mention it? when and how? (starting to
sound like seventeen magazine...)
• how does our practice of contact
change our sexual/touch boundaries in
the world?
• where are the gays and lesbians in Cl?
• is there a line beyond which sexual
expression becomes inappropriate?
where is that line?
• what are our values and assumptions
based on gender?
• are there emotional dynamics at a jam
which stimulate the need to couple (or
to sex) as a survival technique?
• are standards for sexual appropriateness
in the dance different for publicly
recognized “couples”?
• to what extend should/do values in the
Cl setting differ from values in the
larger community?
• how do community judgements about
sexuality affect a person’s standing in
the community?
• there was a desire to hear stories
concerned with communicating about
sexuality in the dance.
(major side track: a fascinating and
blaring sub-issue has to do with this
much-used word COMMUNITY. are we
one? what defines us? what are our
values? does everyone who studies
contact improvisation belong? is membership
immediate?)
this is a random smattering of comments:
• there seems to be a difference between
sensual and sensory, many people have
sensory experiences while dancing
which are somehow more analytical
than sensual experiences which seem to
arise from within.
• we were all very curious about the
idea of experiencing sexuality without
arousal, the whole concept of arousal
became an interesting pivot, how is it
defined? does this change a dance from
sensual to sexual? from appropriately
sexual to inappropriately sexual?
• in the dance, some people experience
sexuality but not in standard forms,
(hmmm)
• there was some talk of intention and
attention, what are we doing in the
dance and where is our focus? is sex a
focus? some people actively channel
energy into non-erogenous zones, some
of us wanted to know where these
zones are located.
• the topic of safety and sexuality was
raised, this included discussion of how
much is too much (sexiness?) and how
this shifts sooo much from person to
person, dance to dance, some dances
feel sensual and sexual and this can feel
like a violation while some dances feel
sensual and sexual and this feels great,
this experience of violation was more
recognized among women present
though there were at least one or two
men who reported similar experiences.
• we tried to define violation and some
thought it centered around being
touched with a sexual intent, another
interesting idea is that violation is onesided
communication.
• then, in my notes there is something
like this:
• there was an attempt to define maturity
as an ability to deflect or manage
energy, this was not a universally accepted
definition.
• it was pointed out that within the
context of Cl, it is possible to touch as
much as we might want to and that this
sharply contrasts experience in the larger
community. this discrepancy is
sometimes troublesome and confusing.
• it was generally agreed that the intimacy
of contacting and the making of
intimate contact bring up many people’s
issues instantly, we did not agree about
what these issues were exactly.
we were hungry and dinner was
about to end so we concluded, on the
whole, i was most satisfied by our willingness
to sit as a group and even begin
such a discussion, nothing earthshat-
tering happened but i am patient, mostly,
we need to find ways to stay with
the juice, in the juice?, and stay out of
too much intellectualizing. this is
tricky, even with sex. 


-------------------

Mirror on the Wall

by Jo Kreiter

It starts with a crossing over
from street to studio that is sometimes
gradual and unlabored and sometimes
directed by meticulous intention.
Upon arrival, I listen for my breath,
acknowledge any discomfort in my
physical body and acknowledge my
mood, energy, the degree of distraction
or presence. Before entering motion, I
strip down to stillness as a dock from
which to set myself adrift. I begin to
explore pathways, seeking familiarity
to ground myself, and also trying to
experience them as if for the first time.
Once I am grounded, motion tingles at
the end of my limbs, then seeps into
the limbs themselves, and finally
washes into my spine. From this
place, I am seeking an initial rhythm,
knowing it may take on many shifts as
I move.
These small motions of arrival can
lead me directly into a duet, or they
can loop me back into a second tier of
stillness. What is consistent, in either
experience, is the meticulous listening
to both internal and external fields of
sensation; if I feel the heat of another
body, if I feel hesitant to connect, if I
feel insecure as I approach someone or
if I feel trust, an invitation, a desire to
speak my inner voice through touch.
The substance of each dance is
multifaceted. In dances driven by
kinetic impulse, flight, suspension, and
physical abandon intersect with a
wildness in me that is unencumbered
by internal reflection. These dances
hold less imagery; the weight exchange
doesn’t pour down into my
internal chambers. These dances are
more peripheral emotionally; instead,
weight reveals itself as a luscious tool
for aerial exploration. Energy becomes
the guide and though I am still
in my body, I give myself over to this
charge as it rushes through pathways
that are completely random, unpredictable
and subsequently delightful.
Then there are other dances, whose
substance draws from internal reserves.
These dances give me a window into
my own complexity, as they start in
my heart and grow outward. These
dances more often begin in stillness; if
I am in a place of grieving, I am more
likely to have this kind of dance.
Sorrow becomes liquid and pours out
from the folds between my bones. If
it is current, its pouring is reckless;
smouldering. If sorrow stems from an
old wound, it has the texture of a
residue—rough, colorless, sometimes
bitter from age. Heart dances are
smaller dances spatially, and yet larger
in terms of exploding open those
microscopic places in the body that
store memory and one’s depth of
experiences.
Heart dances lend themselves to
narrative. Imagery enters and transports
me to an altered time and place.
A story unfolds. I am myself and also
a character drawn from an altered
state—a voice that does not surface
easily in the conscious world, but that
finds an opening through the rhythm
of the dance. I feel my creativity on
fire in these moments. I feel deeply
connected to a power that is often
unspoken and buried in me. I feel
connected to my partner—knowing we
are sharing an experience and that our
attention and presence are streamlined
into a single focus—but knowing too
that our imaginations are pulling from
vastly different sources, hence our
dance may contain many stories.
Heart dances come for me only
when I feel a great deal of trust. I
have had heart dances with strangers,
lovers, and those in between. This
leads me to an understanding that trust
in the dance does not come from
knowledge of a person per se but from
presence—from meeting up with
someone who embraces time and
space and motion as a sacred frame
for seamless listening.
I also experience dances that pass
in and out of heart dances and kinetic
dances while keeping a through-line
that connects each segment into a
unified whole. These blended dances
are nonlinear; their shifts cannot be
mapped out There is a certain
rhythm of exertion and rest, but I
can’t predict the places where my
heart will come through until it actually
winds its way into perceptible sensation.
As with any relationship, I cannot
give my trust unless I know my own
boundaries. My practice of contact
improv has helped me learn this vital
lesson. I have had dances where I felt
an impending sense of violation because
I have not known how to honor
my own voice. The dance has given
me a chance to witness the gaps in my
own process of claiming power. For
example, ending a dance. Feeling a
need to disconnect and yet not
speaking that need, verbally or nonverbally.
And so feeling over-run by a
dance that has taken me beyond where
I want to go. My shortfalls with
communication have burrowed deeply
into my body, hence the dance is a
story teller; a mirror on the wall. Its
fables are ancient, timely, and bursting
with metaphor.
I cannot hide when I am dancing.
At times I try to hide, and in these
moments I tuck my body into a cold,
sightless state—attached to nothing
vital or alive. In the purest dances,
though, the intricate demands of physical
presence disallow hiding and
motion becomes a tool for seeking the
truth of who I am.
In contact, I value listening, willingness,
curiosity, laughter, the investment
of one’s emotions. I also value
carefulness. At times I am fragile to
the point of breaking, but still I want
to connect with someone, to feel a part
of something. It is a great challenge
to trust that a partner can hear my
fragility, as there is a certain terror in
the vulnerability that ensues. It’s not
a state of being I seek out willingly.
And yet it emerges again and again.
If I find myself ignoring the vulnerability
stored in my body, then I am cut
off from a part of my vitality and the
dance loses potency. Dances that
contain this kind of internal betrayal
are marked by artifice. They do not
empower.
Stretching beyond artifice. This,
above all, is what I value in the
dance... Finding a place of authenticity
in the multifaceted combinations
of hand upon shoulder, shoulder skirting
underneath hips, hips upon a ledge
of the spine... Finding a universe of
wisdom through the layering and unlayering
of one body with another...
Finding heart, fire and grace among
the tossing and tangling of ligaments,
tendons, and bones.

---------------

Cohesion & Noncohesion
by Barry Hynum

INTRODUCTION
At the ’93 Memorial Day
weekend Harbin Hot Springs Jam, a
series of scores and informal classes
refined a polarity I have been toying
with for some time: the cohesion-noncohesion
continuum.
Cohesion is loosely defined as sticking
together, to varying degrees, as if
glued. In some cases, while dancing
Contact Improvisation, one partner
seems to hang in an impossible position
as if glued to a spot on their partner. In
other cases, there is articulation at the
point of contact that allows the supported
person to rotate like a wheel on that
point of contact. Still other cases have
a moving point of contact that is sustained
indefinitely. Contact would not
be contact without cohesiveness. Clinging
is a form of excessive cohesion.
Noncohesion is the tendency for
dancers to separate. This can happen in
a number of ways. If the point of contact
is seen as the center of a wheel, as
the wheel spins, centrifugal forces can
direct the dancers apart. The force of
gravity, when it exceeds the resistance
of friction through the point of contact,
can also cause separation. Additionally,
the spontaneity of the dancers may lead
them into “distancing” themselves from
each other as part of the improvisation.
Noncohesion can have an evasive quality
to it when one or both of the partners
for whatever reason does the “I-don’t-
want-to-touch” dance; this would be the
opposite of clinging.
For me, balance in a contact improv
is an ebb and flow of cohesion and
noncohesion, bonding and unbonding,
integration and disintegration.
The following events during the jam
fed into my materializing concept.
of about 35 people are wandering
through a rectangular space. At the
sound of a chime everyone secretly
picks a protector and an attacker. Then
each person moves in such a way as to
keep the protector between them and
the attacker. This looked like two or
more epicenters that would catastrophically
form, disintegrate and reform until
the chime sounded again. (This looked
somewhat like an exercise Robert Ellis
Dunn did with the classes at the Naropa
Institute where a group of dancers
would wander through the space until
someone yelled “Swarm.” The instigator
could spiral in place or streak across
the space gathering the others, forming
globs of dancers or swirling rivers
depending on their movement.)
A second score was suggested by
another participant where the roles
shifted at the sound of the chime. The
attacker became the protector and vice
versa. Visually, it looked the same, but
more dynamic.
What I saw in these scores was the
cohesion-noncohesion continuum in
collective space; one would stay relatively
close to or bonded to the protector
(cohesion) and keep a maximum
distance from the attacker (noncohesion).
In free form improv, balanced cohesion
and noncohesion is seen as ease
and flexibility in movement in and out
of the life space, or kinesphere, of the
partner(s). With a stronger cohesion
preference, the partners would look
more like ballroom dancers and stay
roughly the same distance apart or
relatively tightly bonded within their
shared kinesphere. With a stronger
noncohesion preference, a duet would
manifest more as two solos with more
distance between the partners.
Karl Frost’s Attackers/Protector
Score
Karl organized a score that relates
nicely to the chaos discussions in the
last issue of CQ. In the score, a group
Preference by Body Region
Cohesion and noncohesion get further
complicated as body parts manifest
different tendencies toward cohesion
depending on skill, fear, physical injury
or psychological injury associated with
the body part. The simplest example is
physical injury. A limb or torso injury
will generally cause evasive behavior on
the part of the dancer if the partner
approaches the injured area. Emotional
or sexual taboos related to a body part
could also cause evasive behavior.
Noncohesion may result from lack of
skills or due to a lack of feeling or
awareness in parts of the body. One
may choose to move quickly past rather
than linger in positions where one feels
nothing or uncomfortable.
Isabel Fine’s Resistance/Passive
Score
Isabel did a morning group score
where, in a duet, one partner would
resist the partnering in any way they
wanted. As the resister, I found myself
moving through space gently but forcefully
maintaining the integrity and direction
of my dance regardless of my
partner’s activity. When the roles shifted
I found my partner evading contact
by moving away from any point of
contact. Another partner avoided all
offers of support.
This becomes very interesting to me
in the context of an undirected improvisation.
There are some dancers who
feel and look as if they playfully skirt
the boundaries of cohesion in order to
create surprise. There are others that
evade with certain parts of their body
for reasons stated above. Then there
are those who are excessively cohesive
either wholly or body part specific; I
see this in the single male in pursuit of
a female more so than in any others.
Still others create the dance by clearly
communicating a cohesive surface or
ledge in the context of a dance; the
partner may or may not take the ledge
but the opportunity is clearly communicated.
Martin Keogh’s Spinning Vertical
Post Exercise
At Harbin, Martin did a lab on flying.
One of the exercises was as follows.
One partner would spin around
their central axis, in a standing position,
while his/her partner would attempt to
join the movement of the spinner in
physical contact by seeing and “aligning”
themselves with the movement.
The spinner maintains a relatively rapid
speed and direction regardless of the
attempts of the partner to join. The
relative disregard that the spinning post
shows to the aligning partner appears
noncohesive.
A more obviously cohesive modification
would be to have the spinning
post “align with” the other, in this case
meaning to offer a surface or a ledge to
the joining partner just as they meet.
This brings up an important aspect of
cohesion and noncohesion, namely the
alignments or adjustments made in a
duet.
In Martin’s lab, the exercise preceding
the spinning post was one of intentional
cohesion. One partner, sitting on
the floor, would start to roll backwards
then rock forwards to pop up to a forward-moving
walk. The aligning partner
would meet the rising partner’s
shoulder just at the transition from
crouching level to low standing, then
ride the rise to standing and be lifted off
the floor. Here the partners stage a
meeting place where they can play with
the possibilities at the meeting point.
The shoulder of the rising partner is the
offered ledge, an obvious cohesive gesture.
There are pros and cons to cohesive
and noncohesive orientations. Many
veteran contacters that I have danced
with seem to prefer the excitement and
risk in contact dancing that favors cohesion
that occurs as an offerless random
event. It’s the synchronistic event or
random occurrence of a ledge and the
partner meeting that ledge that seems to
fire their imaginations.
Cohesion as an Attractor and
Stabilizer
When partners move together, presenting
surfaces or aligning in ways that
offer clear lines of support, the surfaces
or ledges act as attractors. The supporting
surfaces of the dancer are somewhat
like the ionic surfaces of molecules.
The visual alignment with and physical
movement toward surfaces resembles
bonding or cohesion. When the alignment
is visually ignored or physically
evaded, the dance takes on a tentative
quality with more brief and accidental
contacts or bondings. The effective
communication of surfaces or ledges
seems to stabilize the dance in that the
smoothness and length of the bonds are
accentuated.
But there seems to come a time in
when the smoothness and length of
bonds are not enough; over the course
of time, clear communication and exchange
of roles becomes too predictable.
At this point some dancers seem
to introduce a kind of clever randomness
to the improvisation. Surfaces are
communicated in a purposely tentative
manner as a kind of challenge: “Can
you do anything with this!?” “Sure!
Can you do anything with this?!” Such
contact dances are the jazz of contact
where the smoother form seems more
like the waltz of contact.
Noncohesion, Point of Contact
Variations, and Changing Levels
Strictly moving from offer to offer
in an exchange of supporting roles can
look and feel a bit monotonous. Thus
a certain amount of unpredictability or
chaos in the dance can lead to delightful
surprises.
Three familiar ways of introducing
variety are noncohesion, variations in
weight through the point of contact, and
changing levels. My background is free
form improv so I enjoy maintaining a
link with my partner through non-touch-
oriented gestures, which is a free form
skill. Thus as I find myself in a nonco-
hesive event I communicate with my
partner through hand, body, facial, or
leg and foot gestures. Much variety is
introduced, after partners have separated,
in the exploration of paths back
into contact.
Much can be added to a dance by
varying the weight through the point of
contact. My teacher, Darshana Ellis,
back in 1987 had us do variations
through the point of contact as a percentage
of body weight: 10% as light
contact, to 100% as fully supported. Of
course, one can put 100% body weight
through only a limited set of supporting
ledges. Putting more weight through a
ledge than it can bear can cause nonco-
hesive events.
Changing levels also adds immeasurable
variety to contact dance. The
higher the level of support, i.e., the
shoulder or extended arm of a standing
partner, often the more precarious the
perch. Finding cohesive pathways from
level to level is part of the wonder of
contact improv.


Axes of Cohesion and
Noncohesion

There are many axes of cohesion
and noncohesion. One obvious one is
physical discomfort (injury or weakness).
A person with an injury will
often keep an “air-cushion” around the
injury so that any movement towards
the injury causes an evasive maneuver
something like putting two magnets
together at the same poles. Similar
maneuvers can be seen if one partner
has sexual/sensual discomfort, intimacy-
distance issues, or softness-hardness
preferences (martial/controlling versus
soft/flowing).
One can playfully impose an axis in
a dance and explore. Typically the use
of the hands is taboo in contact interaction
for beginners so that they can learn
to be present with the rest of the body.
Thus the hands would be playfully
evasive and the rest of the body cohesive.
In Martin Keogh’s spinning post
exercise, the spinning post is being
playfully noncohesive by purposefully
not aligning with the joining partner’s
attempts to find a ledge. Here the non-
cohesiveness is more attitudinally than
physically motivated.

Percussive Contact in the Context
of Cohesion and Noncohesion
It is interesting to see the effect of
variations in cohesion-noncohesion on
the percussiveness of a dance. When
two partners both go to meet the point
of contact forcefully, a kind of percussive
or concussive impact can result.
Two cohesive partners may never have
any space between them for a percussive
impact to take place. If one person
is cohesive and the other is evasive, you
see a cat and mouse dance that can have
percussive impacts when the cohesive
partner finally makes contact with the
evader. Mismatches in cohesion-noncohesion
preferences may lead to the
“misses” and percussive impacts with
the third partner in all duets—the floor.
Contacters seem to get smoother and
less accidentally or unconsciously percussive
with experience.
Two Types of Control: Cohesive
and Noncohesive
Two poles of the control continuum
have cohesive and noncohesive components
as well. The cohesive controller
will stay in close proximity to the partner
and direct the dance through the
point of contact The noncohesive controller
will control the dance by moving
away or keeping a certain permissible
distance. Radical examples of these
forms of control are: (1) the dancer who
has only one pressure through the point
of contact (full force!), and (2) the dancer
who is feather light and never really
there in a supportive way for the partner.
Bear in mind that there is no criticism
intended in these descriptions,
where I am is always the place or envelope
from which I may continue to
learn. The cohesive-noncohesive continuum
is just another construct for examining
and articulating preferences that
affect the form that a dance takes.
Contact Etiquette
At Harbin, Julie Oak organized a
contact etiquette discussion. In this
discussion I realized that my dance with
any new partner involves a sampling
process wherein I test the cohesion-
noncohesion boundaries of my new
partner. Then, after establishing the
boundaries, I linger in the permissible
zone and see what I can do in playing
with and between the permissible safe
spaces. It’s not unlike sculpting: I do a
rough cut of the okay-space then refine
the sculpture as the dance continues,
exploring nuance, but above all honoring
boundaries. When I touch or get
near an evasively loaded body part, it
often creates wobble or the instability
one feels when the same poles of two
magnets are brought together. Energetic
noncohesion creates an instability that
provides (provokes) risk and surprise in
the tumble to find a stable configuration
again. Thus I have evolved an etiquette
that (1) seeks to establish the boundaries
of acceptable points of contact and (2)
balances cohesion and noncohesion
dynamics within these boundaries.
Blind Spots
I don’t think that everyone is aware
of their cohesive-noncohesive tendencies.
I know that I am unaware of my
own except in fleeting moments here
and there. I think it’s much easier to
see someone else’s patterns than my
own, hence working with this continuum
would be best approached with a
partner or teacher/observer who is familiar
with the continuum and can point
out the ease or difficulty in making
contact wholly or body part by part
Teaching
In teaching contact, I demonstrate
the basics of cohesion and noncohesion
along with other skills. In the process
of demonstrating cohesion and noncohesion
in an exercise I point out excessively
cohesive or noncohesive maneuvers,
first to be sure there is consciousness
of the behavior, and secondly to
offer opportunities to explore options.
Thus I ensure awareness of alternatives.
Often beginners will have unconscious
evasive maneuvers like the gap
between the chest and the hips that
results in “scoots” or jumps from chest
to hip versus a smooth rolling point of
contact through chest to tummy to hip.
Experiencing touch on a previously
unconscious part of the body can range
from delightful surprise (“Oh! I didn’t
realize I could do that!”) to more therapeutic
explorations (“Gee, that’s a bit
scary.”). In all cases of dread associated
with certain body parts, I personally
honor the memory stored there. Typically,
with time, the untouchability
heals and diminishes as a student deepens
their exploration of contact improvisation.
In my efforts to deepen my own
explorations, I have a basic pattern that
I follow. My problems in flow have
two basic discontinuities: too cohesive
or too noncohesive. In both cases the
exploration is similar.
In teaching, if I find one of my students
stuck or too sticky in certain
places, I put the student in that stuck
place and introduce noncohesive elements
a little at a time to unbond the
glue that they seem to have in that
place. We explore various flowing
routes from that stuck place to other
stable configurations. Typically each
route will have its own difficulties
which, when practiced, smooth out and
become unconscious competencies.
Conversely, if I find myself or one
of my students scooting or jumping
evasively over some place in the dance,
then that noncohesive spot can become
the subject of an exploration. I find
ways to linger in or introduce cohesive
alternatives within the context of the
noncohesive spot. We move together
from various stable cohesive places in
the dance to and through the unstable
noncohesive spot in such a way that we
become consciously skillful in our interactions
in and around the noncohesive
spot. Eventually through drills and
play, the unconscious scoots and percussive
impacts disappear.
