Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen is a movement artist,
researcher, educator, therapist, and developer
of the Body-Mind Centering® approach to
movement and consciousness. Her work has
influenced the fields of dance, bodywork, yoga,
body psychotherapy, infant and child development,
and many other body-mind disciplines. She is
the author of three books and numerous videos
on dance, embodied anatomy, embryology, and
working with children with special needs.
www.bodymindcentering.com
Ray Chung is a teacher, performer, and engineer,
who has a passion for dancing which he likes to
share with other people.
Toni Craige is an MFA candidate in dance
at Smith College. Her work sources contact
improvisation and Body-Mind Centering®. Her
thesis research (choreographed and written) is
partly inspired by the powerful perceptual shifts
she experienced while training with Kitsou. She’s
excited to be teaching semester-long courses in
improvisation and contact improvisation in the
Five Colleges this school year.
www.tonicraige.com
Sally E. Dean (USA, UK, NO) has been a
performer, choreographer, teacher, and somatic
practitioner for 20 years throughout Europe,
Asia, and the USA. Sally leads the collaborative
Somatic Movement, Costume & Performance
Project (2011), designing Somatic Costumes™
that generate psychophysical awareness and
performances. Sally is a research fellow at Oslo
National Academy of Arts. www.sallyedean.com
Thomas F. DeFrantz directs SLIPPAGE@
Duke:Performance|Culture|Technology; explores
emerging technology in live performance. Believes
in our shared capacity to do better and engage our
creative spirit for a collective good that is anti-racist,
anti-homophobic, proto-feminist, and queer-
affirming. Contributed concept and voice-over for
a permanent installation on Black Social Dance at
the Smithsonian Museum of African American Life.
Teaching: Lion’s Jaw Festival; Movement Research;
ImPulsTanz; New Waves Institute; Hampshire
College, Stanford, Yale, MIT, NYU, University of
the Arts, Duke. Founding member, Collegium for
African Diaspora Dance. www.slippage.org
Adam Dipert is a Postdoctoral Research Associate
at Arizona State University and works at Duke and
North Carolina State universities. His career as a
circus performer continues nationwide. Adam’s
study of zero-gravity movement and perception
are converging in a number of forms, including
conference presentations, collaborations, training,
and writing. Recently, his research has been
directed toward philosophical implications of
cognitive embodied development in gravitational
fields. He looks forward to sharing his findings
soon. www.adamdipert.com
Kitsou Dubois makes dreamlike pieces—in situ
and on film—and video installations. Since 2016,
as an artist-researcher, her aim has been to share
her experience with art experts and with sound
and visual experimental artists and researchers.
She wants to develop a formal, technical, and
collective experimentation and body knowledge
between research, training, and creation. Kitsou
works interdisciplinarily in digital arts, dance, and
circus arts to question the possibility, real or virtual,
of re-creating the weightless condition for the
audience. www.kitsoudubois.com
Simone Forti is a dancer, artist, and writer, who
studied dance improvisation with Anna Halprin
and composition, with a focus on John Cage, with
educator/musicologist Robert Dunn. Since the
1980s, Forti has been weaving movement and
words together. Taking the news as subject matter,
she calls these improvised performances News
Animations. Forti has published two books and
is represented by The Box Gallery, LA.
Margit Galanter is a dance poet living on
Huichin—occupied Ohlone land known as
California, East Bay. In the past several years,
Margit has been developing movement nature
culture projects and the vivid grove—a live art
organism for moving, learning, creative evolution,
and collective liberatory practices.
www.vividgrove.org
Sabrina Huth (GER) and Ilana Reynolds (FR, US)
are freelance dance artists who have never met in
the flesh. They have been collaborating since July
2018, when they were supposed to work together
at the 6th IDOCDE Symposium at ImPulsTanz Festival
in Vienna. One of them did not make it. Since then,
they collectively investigate and perform on topics
of absence, fiction, and the in-between.
https://imaginedchoreographies.com/
Karinne Keithley Syers is a writer and teacher
whose work spans plays, songs, sound, dance,
animation, video, bookmaking, essay, and points in
between. Web treasury at fancystitchmachine.org
Lily Kiara makes dance performances and was
taught and trained in European countries, the
USA, Australia, and Indonesia. Her work comes
to form through a refined and fierce dedication
to improvisation. Poetry, stillness, and urgency
are at the heart of her work. A singer-songwriter,
she performs solo and with her band, The RIVER.
www.lilykiara.nl
Petra Kuppers is a disability culture activist,
community performance artist, and professor at
the University of Michigan. She lives in Ypsilanti,
Michigan, where she co-creates Turtle Disco, a
somatic writing studio. Her current work focuses
on ecosomatic approaches to performance
and writing.
Diana Lara is a choreographer and performer
certified in developmental movement by the
School of Body-Mind Centering®. She is on
the faculty at City College of San Francisco,
Older Adults Department. She holds a degree in
medicine and an MS in population and health from
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana, Mexico.
www.dianalara-somatics.com
Julie Nathanielsz is a movement artist, teacher,
and initiator of and collaborator on numerous
creative projects in a diversity of communities of
movers since 1996. She lives in Ithaca, New York.
julienathanielsz.com
Kevin O’Connor is an artist working as a
choreographer, dancer, improviser, and biodynamic
cranial sacral practitioner. Originally from Ontario,
he is now based in the Bay Area. His PhD
performance research examines anatomies,
body performance capacities, interventions,
and imaginations in relation to science studies,
including the bio-cultural tissue called fascia.
www.ecologicalbodying.com
Steve Paxton writes and thinks about dance at
a table. By a window. On a farm in Vermont, USA.
Marcela Ponce is a Feldenkrais practitioner,
dancer, and choreographer. She holds an MFA in
Dance from the University of Quebec at Montreal
and a bachelor’s degree in Choreography from
the National Institute of Fine Arts in Mexico. She
explores the link between Feldenkrais and the
creative process in dance.
Dulce Trejo is a somatic movement educator
and performer. She holds an MFA in Performing
Arts Studies from the Free University of Brussels,
and she is a faculty member at the Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México as well as at the
Universidad de Londres, Theater Department.
Takahiro Yamamoto is an artist and
choreographer based in Portland, Oregon. He
has produced original performances and visual
artworks nationally and internationally. He is
a graduate of Pacific Northwest College of Art,
with an MFA in Visual Studies. He co-directs the
performance company madhause with Ben Evans
and is part of the Portland-based performance
support group Physical Education (P.E.) with
Allie Hankins, keyon gaskin, and Lu Yim.



Throwing the Bouquet: Part One
Measured on a shelf, the full run of Contact Quarterly’s print
issues—from Vol. 1#1, published in April 1975, through the
last issue, Vol. 44#2, Summer/Fall 2019—amounts to a neat 23.75
inches wide.
In my imagination, I throw them all up in the air at once, seeing
each individual page, article, sentence, thought, author, dance,
drawing, comma deliberation, press run, printer, subscriber—all
of it—flying up and apart. It’s as if the pressure of holding these
dynamic experiences, flattened together between two covers,
standing side by side on a shelf, has finally reached its limit, a
critical mass that must explode, transform into another medium,
another state.
I follow the fountain of pages, CQ ’s ultimately untrackable holographic
dissemination of embodied dance practice and discovery over the
last 45 years, as the issues unbind and spread out. The aeration is
a relief. The dances hover, shimmer, and shift. Gravity hasn’t yet
taken hold of the bits and brought them back down to earth. Maybe
it never will. Maybe new forces are at work here, conditions that
don’t yet have names but do have influence. Maybe our next dance
forms, creations, revelations, practices, collaborations, improvisations,
breathe a different kind of air, travel best through materials and media
we haven’t yet considered, invented, discovered, or recognized.
What you hold in your hands is CQ ’s last print periodical publication.
Hold it tight. Hold it loose. Savor it. Celebrate its unique 45-year run,
in which you have actually played a significant part. Now set it down
gently—or enjoy a good hard dash of it to the ground, or just let it
fall from your hands and watch gravity take it down. And then come
with us as we shift our editorial weight to CQ Unbound , our year-round
online publication, and to whatever other adventures come next.
In this moment I can feel the familiar thrill of making something
unfamiliar, the awkwardness and fear and promise of uncertainty,
the suspension of belief that allows a new thing to arise, to be
recognized and welcomed. We’re walking the improvisational talk
as we enter this new unknown.
I stand in awe of this change. I shift my weight from leg to leg,
from land (print) to air (online), not yet certain of the forms that
will arise to communicate the dancing, thinking, feeling, movement
discovery, and experiences we will have next.
My collaboration with the incomparable brilliance and particularity
of Contact Quarterly/Contact Editions codirector and coeditor Lisa
Nelson has been central to CQ over these decades. Together, we
have made manifest the very specific and circumstantial collection
of voices, images, designs, layouts, and formats necessary for CQ
and Contact Editions. The perpetual friction of our differences has
continued to irritate, stimulate, and illuminate the passion we have
for encouraging and documenting the articulation of the mysteries
of the moving body. It is one of my life’s most unpredictable, precious,
challenging, beloved, and valued collaborations.
photo by Nancy Stark Smith
Improvising at the CQ office, April 2015.
And then there’s the essential, largely invisible team of brilliant
and committed editors and designers that have made the last 20+
years of issues possible. Working side by side with me every step
of the way, the designers (Lila Hurwitz, Patrick O’Rourke, and Jill
Apolinario), associate editors (Mary Ramsay, Melinda Buckwalter,
Nyx Zierhut, Aretha Aoki, Lailye Weidman, and Meredith Bove), and
hardworking CI Newsletter coeditors (Cheryl Pallant, Pen Dale,
Sue Lauther, Sara Zolbrod, Neige Christiansen, Dey Summer, and
Colleen Bartley) have bridged connections between CQ and new
generations and communities of artists, proofread every comma
on the final pages, voiced opinions about page and cover designs,
and initiated and followed up on communication with authors. For
pitifully low wages, their commitment and vision have contributed
more to CQ ’s legacy than could ever be measured.
Right now, I’m picturing the bouquet of issues—with a strong
intention of sharing the innovation and inspiration that brought
them together—unbinding as it flies and, after a long luxurious
suspension, falling in a myriad of delightful ways into your many
unsuspecting hands.
With love and profound thanks for your sustained trust and
creative engagement with CQ now, in years past, and in the
unknowable and thus infinitely possible future, where our
dancing bodies and minds will continue to meet.
Nancy Stark Smith
P.S. Part 2 of Throwing the Bouquet (and the original impetus
for that title)—a passing of the Contact Improvisation archival
baton—will jump the frame of this Note, crossing the bridge to
CQ ’s online home, CQ Unbound . Read more on our website:

Moving Ideas—Physical and Virtual Spaces:
CQ & Me & CQ and...
I first heard about CQ from Leah Stein in 1994, as an
undergraduate student at Swarthmore College [in Swarth-
more, PA] when she encouraged us to submit our writings
about our experiences with CI. It felt exciting to me that
a publication would want to hear from college students.
I didn’t submit in the end, but it was my first exposure
to the journal, and I thoroughly enjoyed the articles and
especially the ads and that it was artist led. I noticed the
Contacts listings in the back of people to reach out to
when traveling, which I did at times.
My second significant experience with CQ was in
2005, when CQ coeditor Melinda Buckwalter invited
me to write about my project Artifacts of the Ephemeral,
which was a residency and installation that took place at
Chisenhale Dance Space in London, England. The final
article, A Moving Installation, appeared in the Place2 issue,
CQ Vol. 32.1, Winter/Spring 2007. I was flattered that the
editors wanted to hear about my small project when there
were other, more established artists, and I was also (and
still am) blown away by the attention that the editorial
team gave me in the process of articulating my ideas, their
desire to understand my practice, and the commitment to
have the writing reflect that, to include details of the felt
sense even down to the title.
My relationship with CQ changed dramatically when
Nancy Stark Smith asked me to be guest coeditor with her
of the CQ CI Newsletter in 2012. Our first Skype call was
over six hours long, going over the ins and outs of making
online and print versions, including photo captions and
credits. We haven’t stopped coediting the Newsletter since,
and it has developed over the past seven years of our work
together. The articles have grown in their scope and length.
We’ve improved systems that enable us to edit live online
and to work remotely. I’ve had the pleasure to work with

Video still of Colleen Bartley in Walk on Blue, filmed by Richard Bleasdale
in 2000 and used as part of Bartley’s Meditations on Vulnerability, 2018.
the writing from more than 200 authors from about 30
countries about their CI practice.
It has been a labor of love and a pleasure to work
with dancers and teachers from all over the world who are
enthusiastic about CI. I have received an education about
publishing, translating, and ways of working with people
to craft their language (in English) to describe and share
their dance practice.
I’d like to bookend this story by mentioning my latest
performance at Chisenhale Dance Space in November
2018, Meditations on Vulnerability. It is directly related to
CQ. I say this because Chisenhale is an artist-led project
that is about the same age as CQ. It’s the place that has
been a home to my eclectic practice and has a kinship
with CI; after Dartington College, Chisenhale is the place
in the UK where CI was practiced most abundantly in its
early years and it supported “New Dance” and had its own
publication. It also relates to the approach I take as an
editor, which is directly related to my creative practice
and my experience of living in the world with a human
body, its form, and its vulnerabilities. Both are artist-led
projects and both have been a home base for me because
of a common ethos of curiosity. As an editor, the authors
take the lead and my role is to “listen” and reflect back and
help them articulate their ideas in their own unique way.

What “First Rule of CI”?
There have been several articles about Contact Improvisa-
tion in recent CQs with prominent references to “the First
Rule of Contact Improvisation,”* most recently “How the
First Rule Brought #MeToo to Contact Improvisation” by
Michele Beaulieux, CQ Vol. 44.1, Winter/Spring 2019, as
well as Martin Keogh’s mention of it in previous CQ articles
and now his book, Dancing Deeper Still. In each case, I have
wanted to pipe up to either edit these mentions or footnote
them with my own opinion, but I resisted, as it felt like an
inappropriate use of my editorial “power” with CQ. It is
only now that I have finally taken the time and page space
to respond. [N.S.S.]
*From Richard Kim’s blog post: “Rules”: “It’s called the First
Rule of CI, or the Only Rule, or…maybe the Fundamental
Principle. Its shorthand version is ‘take care of yourself,’ but
I’ve heard it expressed as, ‘Above all else, you are responsible
for yourself.’”
In my experience as a member of the first group
practicing Contact Improvisation with Steve Paxton in
1972, the original training for Contact and the foundation
for the early years of its development encouraged both an
awareness of our own limits and (mostly physical) safety,
and, an awareness of those around us. This emphasis on
awareness and safety for all continues to be at the founda-
tion of my own practice and teaching of CI. The idea of
taking care of yourself—in other words, of dancing with
awareness so as to work within your limits (however
drawing by Neca Zarvos
you perceive them)—was never a call to be only, or even
primarily, concerned with one’s own safety and well-being.
We were always looking out for each other.
It seems that perhaps the “telephone game” phenom-
enon is at work here. Apparently some people who heard
the initial suggestion in early CI classes to “take care of
yourself and those around you (through the use of periph-
eral vision, etc.)” were so happy to be given permission to
prioritize taking care of themselves that the second half of
that suggestion/principle withered on the vine. Eventually,
it seems, the suggestion was further reduced to “take care
of yourself first (and foremost)” and achieved First Rule of
CI status. Ouch! This hurts me every time I hear it.
I wonder when this term “first rule” emerged. It
certainly was not there in the first years of CI. There
were no explicit rules as far as I remember—only an
atmosphere and practice of encouraging mutual safety,
support, and discovery. (And the suggestion to put one
foot back when catching a hurtling body so you could
spiral on the way down and not just be knocked over.)
When I recently brought up this “first rule” phenome-
non with “first generation” CI dancer Nita Little, she was
stunned and said she had never heard the term before.
So I think it’s fair to say that this construction is a more
recent invention. It was not “there from the beginning,”
as is regularly implied in exchanges on social media and
in writing that I’ve seen. Exactly when it began, I don’t
know. Although it seems pervasive now among many CI
practitioners and communities, I think it might be useful
for CI researchers, teachers, and practitioners to know
that it was not part of the foundation of the work.
The phenomenon of this kind of reduction of
values, intentions, and suggestions into inaccurate and
all-too-solid dogmas and rules is a compelling, albeit
disconcerting, study.
I am grateful to feel the current questioning and
discussion concerning this important but apparently
misunderstood, misnamed, and misused principle: which
was, and is, for me always about taking care to dance in
such a way as to not injure yourself or others.
I set out to construct a timeline of my involvement with
contact improvisation and Contact Quarterly and was,
needless to say, extremely grateful to own an almost
complete set of back issues—because at my advanced age,
I discover that though I can recall places and dates, I am
losing my memory for names. Herewith, what I was able
to pull together:
1975: A fledgling dance critic for the Canadian Broadcast-
ing Corporation, I’m invited to show up at the Vancouver
Opera Association for what turns out to be Steve Paxton
and Nancy Stark Smith’s first performance of Contact
Improvisation in Vancouver, BC. This encounter utterly
upends my sense of what dance might be.
1977: I enroll in workshops at Vancouver’s Western Front,
where I study CI with members of ReUnion (Steve, Nancy,
Nita Little, and Curt Siddall), and Mangrove (Curt, Byron
Brown, John LeFan, and James Tyler). My first effort at
writing about Contact, broadcast on the CBC in June, is
transcribed and reprinted in an early issue of the Contact
Newsletter. Later, I travel to Berkeley for the July Project
in the Moving Arts, an intensive involvement with Curt,
James, Terry Sendgraff, and Ruth Zaporah.
1979: Having moved back to New York and taken a job
running the American Dance Guild, I use my vacation to
return to Vancouver for Current Exchange, a gathering of
experienced contactors led by Steve and including a very
young Stephen Petronio. He heads for New York and a job
as the first male in the Trisha Brown Dance Company.
The idea emerges to make improvisation the focus of
the Guild’s next annual meeting…
1980…to be held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, in June,
with Steve as the keynote speaker; Anna Halprin as the
guest of honor; and practically every contact dancer on
the continent involved in a teaching capacity. We call it
Dance as Art Sport, after a remark by Simone Forti.
1982: In a CI class in Manhattan, I tumble off Petronio’s
back and bruise my coccyx, convincing myself that it’s
time to let this practice go. But by then I’ve been drafted
onto the board of Contact Collaborations, Inc.; I find,
tucked in with the back issues, copies of minutes of
board meetings and a draft book proposal for a “field
guide” to contact improvisation, which never material-
ized; Cynthia Novack’s 1990 Sharing the Dance and other,
later treatises—and of course, CQ itself—filled this need.)
Novack died in 1996. As I page through my huge
collection of back issues, I become aware of how many of
our colleagues are gone, including James Tyler, my college
classmate; dancer and teacher Nancy Topf; choreographer
Trisha Brown; and countless dancers and writers who
wrote to and in CQ. I was rarely one of those writers, as
my economic situation made it necessary to be paid for
my work.
From its photocopied beginnings, the magazine grew
thicker, fancier, less frequent, but has always been full of
invaluable material from across the world. Now, in 2019,
we bid farewell to this print edition of CQ, as we have to
so many other publications. Though I love paging through
old paper copies, digital materials are much more easily
searchable and more widely, quickly, and inexpensively
distributed. CQ is dead; long live CQ—and the generations
of thinkers, doers, and writers who’ve contributed to this
unique chronicle.
With thanks to Nancy, Lisa Nelson, Steve, and all the rest
of the crew,
In celebration of the digital adventure—CQ becomes
accessible? It is really a new adventure to try and promote
CQ to new readers.
Touchdown Dance (TD), a unique company founded
in 1986 at Dartington College in Devon, UK, by Steve Paxton
and Anne Kilcoyne, grew from an idea of Steve’s to bring
together visually impaired and sighted people in the
Contact Improvisation (CI) experience. It appeared that a
touch-based movement method would be of use to touch-
based navigators in the world, and an accessible means to
bring diverse bodies together. Something extraordinary is
seeded by the very idea of CI, and new movement evolves,
shapes itself into form spontaneously—like a choreography
of presence, of pause in motion. TD grew into a ground-
breaking experience that people travel far and wide to do.
Steve and Anne’s article on TD [“Common Sense”]
was one of a wave of initiatives that were written about for
the first time in a substantial way in CQ in your “Dancing
with Different Populations” issue in 1992 [CQ Vol. 17.1].
The world of somatic practices, improvised scores, and
CI-based methods have been the foundation to Touchdown’s
performances since 1992. Currently, Touchdown Dance
has three visually impaired and two sighted dancers

making work, dancing CI, and improvising whilst teach-
ing around the UK and internationally. We created an
education pack in which the CI methods and legacy of
Steve and Anne are relayed in word and image to inform
community and education settings in which we work.
We are avid readers and supporters of CQ—and feel
relieved, as it goes digital, that it will be more accessible
to screen reader software and saving trees!!
Katy Dymoke; Manchester, UK
Artistic director, Touchdown Dance (since 1994)
Dear CQ,
The transference of movement information through the
global contact improvisation community—an example:
We were fortunate to have a copy of Contact Quarterly,
Summer/Fall 2000 (Vol. 25.2), passed on from an elder
teacher who had two copies—shared with her keen
and developing CI dancer friends in Newcastle, a small
Contact community three hours north of Sydney.
The article “Spacewalk—Reflections on Nancy Topf’s
Spacewalk Improvisation” was read and reflected on. How
tragically this woman died and yet how wonderful that
she lives on through her work then and now. Excerpts
were read to our dance improvisation collective, and
the exercise interpreted and performed. So playful and
dynamic. Thanks, Nancy. And thanks Contact Quarterly.
Definitely a journal for moving ideas!

Even though it is only the paper version of CQ we are
saying goodbye to, it is still a heart-wrenching goodbye
to the physical, holdable, lie-on-your-bedside-table-able,
put-in-your-bag-able, loanable, savorable version of the
magazine that has given me, for forty-odd years, a great
being to belong to, whose wise, laughing, listening, and
loving arms reach around the globe.
Even though the online version thrives, lives on,
goes out even farther and wider than the beloved paper
one, I feel a loss, and a need to express my gratitude for
all the years and all the labor that went into making it,
sacrificing personal creative time for the benefit of the
collective.
Nancy and Lisa, Melinda and all the fabulous
assistant and guest editors, designers, and staff over the
years, you have been for me the roots of a magnificent tree,
nourishing all of us who wanted to exchange our stories,
news, and ideas, add our leaf, our flower, our pine cone
loaded with winged seeds, in hopes that the winds might
carry our feelings far. You gave us access to those winds,
lifting us all into the sky on such far-reaching branches,
giving all that such great beings give: inspiration, nourish-
ment, shelter in the storm, and the very air we breathe. I
am a leaf on that tree, and there is not even a way for me
to imagine my life without you.

At the Somatics Festival 2019 in Northampton, MA, in
September—celebrating the work of Janet Adler, Bonnie
Bainbridge Cohen, Nancy Stark Smith, and the 45-year
Heritage of Contact Quarterly—I sat on a panel titled
“Archiving the Experience of the Body in Motion” with
several distinguished archive curators.
As editor of Currents Journal of the Body-Mind
Centering Association and Lost & Found: The CUNY
Poetics Document Initiative, I felt ready to speak to
being immersed in people’s archives—my grandmother’s
buttons, my father’s papers, and, later, the NYC municipal
archives in search of archaeological sites. But it wasn’t
until I studied Body-Mind Centering that I was able to
account for my own body and “dig” back to my earliest
training, the Rhythms Fundamentals (of Ruth Doing)—
a vital, but rare artifact of the American Physical
Culture Movement.
During the panel’s closing, Nancy Stark Smith
asked how to create an archive that was “active,” how to
“translate experience into language and then open it back
into experience.” I get it—the dancer’s archive interlopes
with the reader/mover by matter of both light (film) and
language (scores, writings, techniques), but dance is
communal; therefore, even the soloist is derivative from a
previous form or technique. Example: I am currently cata-
loguing Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen’s papers (1970–present)
bound for their archival home. But does the founder’s work
stand alone? At this panel, Cohen said, “This work was
created in community.” She wonders how to house a
50-year dialogue that evolved Body-Mind Centering?
Librarians and academics must take into account the
nature of the bodies of the archive. It becomes a place that
strikes us in situ and in choir. The archive is an emotional
and tactile experience not unlike the contact improvisa-
tion–feeling of profundity of weight, matter, and current
(flow). As Nancy put it, “the translation of the language
back into experience,” and, in Bonnie’s words, “the work…
in community.” I call it summoning the interface.
Shall we enter the bodies of the archive from the
perspective of the mover as well as the language of the
movement? Finally, there ought to be a way to fashion a
“mover’s papers” with enough interface as to allow for
our touch.
Kate Tarlow Morgan, MA, RSME;
Marlboro, Vermont
I’m mourning the last of CQ’s classy print periodicals.
Congratulations and best wishes for CQ Unbound (great
name!). With gratitude and love,

Aileen Crow was a beloved teacher and prolific somatic
researcher who combined her study and practice of many
techniques and philosophies of movement, creativity, and
healing to transform the lives of her students, colleagues,
and anyone who came in contact with her and her work.
A Laban Movement Analyst, teacher of the Alexander
Technique since 1969, and practitioner of Neuro-Linguis-
tic Programming, Aileen brought together Authentic
Movement, Mindell’s Dreambody Process Work, and a
multitude of other bodywork, therapeutic, movement,
and creative disciplines to guide people into movement,
creativity, and wellness.
Her clear writings, playful character drawings,
and illuminating insights contributed lucid, embodied
research to Contact Quarterly.
Paula Sager, cofounding editor of A Moving Journal,
writes, “Aileen had an eye for rogue movement patterns—
the odder the better—and an ear for the unspoken word,
the invisible sound. She had a nose for the best of each
modality she mastered and an unparallel appetite for
unfolding process. She was a big-hearted, rebel-minded
contributing editor for A Moving Journal, engaging con-
tinuous, dynamic research and dialogue in the field of
Authentic Movement.”
Aileen lived in New City, NY, and was 93 when
she passed away on April 13, 2019. In addition
to CQ’s back issues (searchable on our website),
Aileen’s writings 

Janis Claxton—an Australian dancer based in Bristol,
UK, and then Edinburgh, Scotland—began her artistic
and teaching practice with the health and wellness of the
body. Her work shows how art is health and health is art
and that art should be enlivening, nourishing, and healing.
Her key ideas about relating in contact improvisation were
anchored in a keen sense of somatic health, informed by
her deep understanding of the Erick Hawkins work.
In leading contact improvisation workshops such
as Dancing in and out of Contact and Returning Home
to the Body, Janis emphasized self-sensing, internal
physics in relation to environment, and detailed alignment
to facilitate students’ precise, expressive, and highly
tuned dancing. She was highly perceptive and insightful
with regard to “stuck points” in one’s dancing. While
workshopping a skill having to do with partnering, she
would often stop and take us to the floor or to the wall
to investigate our own patterning. Working on patterns
to release and align the body led to openings and under-
standings in the physical, emotional, and mindful aspects
of dancing—often leading to a deeper sense of creativity
and self knowledge. Janis was a powerful teacher who
could quickly bring students to their inner truths and
to the heart of the matter.
Erick Hawkins was a profound inspiration for Janis,
and she credits him with the initiation of somatic investiga-
tion in the field of modern dance. Janis herself was a tireless
advocate for healthy dance practice, somatic intelligence,
and women in dance. She was strongly critical of the
trends toward extreme bodies in performance. In our
last conversation, she was enthusiastically checking my
feminist outlook, sharpening my critical thinking, and
sharing her amazing energy and insight! I am so grateful
for her work, artistry, making, and teaching.
Tamara Ashley, UK
Robin MacRostie
April 16, 1945–September 29, 2019
An active and beloved member of the Western Massachusetts
arts community, Robin MacRostie brought her creative
spirit and passion for dance to everything she did. A long-
time member of Dance Generators, an intergenerational
dance company, she was involved in many aspects of arts
and activism, and was well-known for her inventive,
imaginative approach to problem-solving and community
action. In addition to studying and performing dance for
almost seven decades, she held a wide range of roles in
the field, including graphic designer, costume designer,
dance teacher, and choreographer for all ages, reflecting
her vigorous commitment to art making and to her
communities. Among her many contributions was the
establishment of PreClassic Dance for Children and
PanValley Dance, a program to teach and perform Isadora
Duncan dance technique. In 2016, Robin worked at Contact
Quarterly as a volunteer, developing the database for
Contact Quarterly’s big library of books and periodicals,
which is still in use. Robin embarked on her next great
adventure on Sunday, September 29, 2019. 

Thank you forever, Steve, for saying Newton forgot to
mention how it feels to be the apple. And thank you
beloved CQ bodhisattvas for giving us the articulated
consciousness of the whole tree, listening to every
apple’s individual description of its journey.
Love and forever falling, Christie Svane
Dear friends at CQ. Wow 45 years! Thank you for all the
information and connections through the years and for the
amazing editing process for articles I have done and for all
articles I’ve ever read. Blessings in your transition.
Much love, Alton Wasson
www.altonwasson.com, www.contemplativedance.org
Thank you, Nancy and Lisa, for 45 years of visionary leadership!
Bringing together dancers, scholars, and artists worldwide,
you’ve helped create a global movement community we can
grow and nurture together for years to come. What a gift to
us all! Love, Susan Bauer


Thank you, CQ, for your unwavering support of research,
reflection, teaching practices, and building communities.
Here’s to your next 45 years!
With gratitude, Jennifer Keller
THANK YOU
…for your dedication and commitment
…for raising discussions and driving our field forward
…for your love and passion for dance
…for the respectful cooperation
…for continuing
Let’s keep in touch!
Rio Rutzinger and the team of the ImPulsTanz


In August 1981 I serendipitously discovered improvisational
dance and CQ at the Vermont Movement Workshop. I still feel
how inspired I was, and am, that the spirit of dance can speak
in such eloquent wor/l/ds as CQ has created. Thank you CQ!
K.J. Holmes
I still remember the thrill of receiving my CQs in the late ’70s
and ’80s and am glad that I became a subscriber again during
these last couple of years of hard copy. Congratulations, Lisa,
Nancy, et al., and I look forward to the future.
Dawn Werme Pratson
To our friends at CQ: Thank you for championing the dancer’s
voice. You are essential to this community. It’s an honor to
celebrate our 45th birthday with you!
With love and respect, Danspace Project
Joining all who have worked on, contributed to, read, or held
CQ in the last 45 years to celebrate the past and cheer on
the future. So many layers and refinements, surprises and
goodwill, discernment and hard work, in each and every
issue—yay! Andrea Olsen
L’histoire de Contredanse s’est liée à celle de CQ. Les mots
que vous avez rassemblés en paragraphes et chapitres sont la
preuve que la danse a plusieurs voix, uniques. L’esprit de CQ
résonne au-delà de l’Atlantique, ici en français avec un accent
belge. De tout notre coeur, chapeau!
Translation: Who Contredanse is today couldn’t have been
without you. Words you gathered in paragraphs and chapters
showed dance has many unique voices. CQ is an inspiration,
its mind echoes across the Atlantic, here with a French Belgian
accent. Hearty bow in your direction.

Thank you CQ. Your pages have been teacher, resource,
sustenance, buttress, lore, radical utopia, home.
Heidi Henderson
You:
• Represent a way of thinking that generates more
curiosity than opinions.
• Let us understand from unusual angles—with one
eye squinting.
• Offer the opportunity to try on ideas, plans, people,
perspectives, images—without losing our own.
• Encourage us to vary our experience of beauty.
Sue Lauther
Thank you CQ for creating this inviting, stimulating, and
inclusive international space where all of us interested in
embodiment can meet, inspire, debate, and collaborate. Your
intrepid, sharp-minded, and generative advocacy for dance,
movement, community, people, and ideas is remarkable and
unmatched. Deeply grateful. Daphne Lowell
Inspired by you, CQ, thus began <proximity> magazine, your
little antipodean sibling: 15 years of vibrant volumes filled with
dancing words and passionate voices, just like you. Thank you
for your support, your leadership, and your commitment to
making connections. With love.


Noise
I’ve been thinking about the idea of ambiguity. Sometimes
I call it “abstraction.” Sometimes it is the unknown, or
obscurity. I would like to start with the idea that things
around us are mostly ambiguous. What we see and under-
stand clearly—articulated ideas, clear shapes of furniture,
harmonized objects, sharp edges of architecture, and so
on—are more or less rare. Of course, we constantly strive
to seek out harmony, connection, order, agreement, clarity,
shape, and the tangible…at least, I find myself seeking
some type of definition for things and ideas.
We are social beings, living in society with others. These
harmonized objects and ideas are also how we communi-
cate with each other. Language, for example, as a symbolic
method of communication, is a product of that bent toward
harmony and connection. A traffic light is created for all
the cars to be regulated and in order on the streets.
Still, I am fascinated with non-harmonized, abstracted,
noise-like things. Things that exist “around” those harmo-
nies, things that are usually dismissed, things that are
always taken for granted, things that are situated in
negative space, things that are mundane or even invisible.
When sidony o’neal—one of the dancers in Direct Path to
Detour (whose individual interdisciplinary practice spans
experimental sound, sculpture, drawing, performance,
and writing)—and I worked on a short improvisational
performance together a few years back, I shared Michel
Serres’s text on “noise.”2 I still remember sidony’s response,
which was to point out the importance of imbalance and
discord as reminders of every noise that we are not able to
hear or that we’ve been hearing too much of.
I do admit that I usually get satisfaction from harmonized
things. They give me a sense of understanding, of proving
that I communicated clearly, of security…but if I give more
attention to the noises (some people might call them “white
noise”), those harmonized things can acquire a renewed
meaning.
As I am writing this, I realize how Buddhist this approach
could seem. Maybe I am a Buddhist. Maybe I am being
Japanese. Maybe I am just being Taka. Whatever.
Even in this technology/Internet-centric society, where
I am used to easy access to seeing and understanding,
I can’t look up noises or abstracted ideas online. I like it
that way. Once a noise is defined, it loses its core quality.
Noise needs to be perceived with awareness and a willing-
ness to surrender. Noise can be interpreted only with time,
because noise transforms and changes moment to moment.
Noise is something to experience, not to understand
intellectually.
Harmony and agreement are rare, but also inevitable. In
this current society, we live with harmony, agreement, and
meaning as much as with chaos and noise. In observing
noise, I want to be open to the effects that harmony and
meaning have on us.

Continually being thrown off balance is another thing;
if a state of complete balance is harmony, then I seek to
keep this harmony constantly dissipating only so that
it can be harmonized or balanced again. Maybe we can
deliberately access harmony for a moment but bypass
it toward something else? So that we never dwell in
harmony or meaning?
I am making a correlation between the concept of noise
and abstraction. In the midst of making Direct Path to
Detour, I started to lose the distinction between those two
concepts. Maybe as I move forward with my practice, I’ll
realize the distinction or confuse myself more and more.
Either way, this project has been driving me forward.
Observation
I believe that art—both ephemeral/experiential forms
like live performance and object/image-based work that
viewers can contemplate at their own pace—has a power
to engage with meanings and ideas. I am thinking beyond
the argument about art as mere self-expression or acciden-
tal self-expression—that engagement with meanings
can happen in various forms, such as creating, exposing/
revealing, defying, denying, investigating, observing,
criticizing, and playing with.
As a maker, I enjoy using my artistic practice to “observe”
an idea or a concept that I’m curious about. Maybe I find
meanings from the act of observing. Curiosity drives my
practice; I observe how I, as a performer, feel/think/do in
relationship to the task that I give myself in front of the
viewers (observers).
I find that I often resonate with liberal and progressive
thinking in contemporary American society. As I learn
more and more, I realize that I am a pure product of capital-
ism and neoliberalism. Maybe that has something to do
with the fact that I grew up in Japanese society, which has
been ideologically driven by capitalistic ideals, especially
since World War II. I get fulfillment out of working hard,
challenging myself, and accomplishing the goals that I set
for myself. In addition to this social factor, my parents are
extremely driven people, continuously encouraging me
and my siblings to act on things rather than to wait for
something to come about. Of course, as an artist, I don’t
make a lot of money (which defies that capitalistic ideal),

but I notice that I find pleasure in productivity and in
striving for something bigger than myself or beyond where
I am at the moment. It seems that an investment in the
practice of observing resists these neoliberal habits that
have been ingrained in me.
In 2004, I studied with theatre artist Mary Overlie,
who, through the teaching of her Viewpoints method,
states that she values being an “observer/participant”
as opposed to a “creator/originator” when she makes
work or performs. It took me a while to understand what
that means to me. When I started making my own work
in 2009, I began to appreciate that way of thinking and
aspired to embody that concept.
From 2010 to 2014, I had an opportunity to learn intimately
about the late Japanese nature photographer-essayist
Michio Hoshino. With an invitation from director Leon
Ingulsrud (from SITI company), I was lucky enough to
research and play the role of Michio in Perseverance
Theatre Company’s original production of The Blue Bear
in Juneau, Alaska. One token of his candid yet profound
lifelong contemplation is the idea that humans are just a
mere part of nature, which criticizes the assumed division
between nature and civilization. His philosophy also
speaks to the cycle of lives—paraphrasing from the script
of the play if I may—from plankton to herrings, herrings
to whales, whales to fishes, fishes to bears, bears to trees,
then trees to plankton. Circle of life. And he states that
we, as humans, are part of this circle. His ideas come
from his experience of spending much time in nature—
observing living things with great patience, tenacity,
curiosity, and obsession.
I believe that Mary Overlie and Michio Hoshino have had
a big influence on my way of observing.
What this observing does for me, especially when done
during live performance, is to put a gentle brake on my
coiled-up, goal-oriented modus operandi. In this technol-
ogy/Internet-centric society, I find myself bored right away
when I don’t have access to understanding at my fingertips,
in a second. But this quality of observing requires perceiv-
ing at a slower speed, allowing me to be with the present
(what I feel physically, what I think at that moment, what
I see) rather than being preoccupied with the future

(reaching toward where I want to go or what I want to
accomplish). I admit that as a choreographer, sometimes
creating a product takes priority over an awareness of time
itself, but I get a high from trying not to strive for the very
ephemeral minutes or hours of performing. This is also
what I feel and value when I view performances.
Yes, live performance always involves an audience/viewers.
Although I sometimes deliberately face the viewers, impli-
cating their gaze in my performative action and inviting
them to be part of the event, I have been learning that this
observation-oriented performance that I’m interested in
has a tendency to be all about the performers (myself),
thus alienating the viewers’ experience. So, in thinking
about viewership as a vital part of this phenomenological
event called live performance, I want to put as much consi-
deration into how viewers engage as with what’s being
presented. What does this “observation” in performance
do to the viewers as they go on a ride with the presented
experience, create meaning and narratives, and invest in
what they see? What kind of experience shall I invite the
viewers to travel through?
I don’t know the answers to those questions. I probably
won’t know the answers for a while, or ever. But this
challenge of holding both my value of observation in
performance and the viewers’ experience in parallel
fuels me in the making process.
Drew Klein, performing arts director at the Contemporary
Arts Center in Cincinnati, has spoken about Direct Path to
Detour in relationship to the idea of “protest.” As much as I
appreciate his perspective, I told him that I see the theme
of this project to be more in line with “resistance.”
I would like us, the performers, to observe while perform-
ing. That is important for me. What if observation can be a
form of resistance?

The observation of noise. The observation of the non-
understandable. Even if it is just pure attempt, is that
compromise? If we find ourselves, in a society, confronted
with varying and sometimes contradictory sets of value
systems, would it be possible to observe that in-between-
ness without taking a side, without arriving at harmony
or order? Could we live in the noise? Could we perceive
ourselves and others as mere noise for a second, encom-
passing a greater whole? Could we be abstract together?
At this point, the question becomes, “Then what? What
follows observation?” The dramaturge Lu Yim pointed this
out to me during the production. Again, I don’t have the
answer at this moment. Intentionality of observation, or
embodiment of the observed/observing states might have
something to do with it, but I can’t articulate that, yet.

I stood before the crown of the saint who founded
Hungary. “Had I been born here, would this crown be
my flag too?” “No. Jewish.” My church is the constitution
of the United States. I let my country do the dirty work.
I’m reading interviews of the beat poets, Ginsberg,
Burroughs, and earlier, Olson, Pound, and…and…
I usually don’t read easily, but I’m reading these
like gulping water.
The Yellow Vests in France demonstrate against gasoline
taxes meant to hold back climate change, easy for the
prosperous in the big cities who demonstrate with signs
and songs and optimism. The Yellow Vests set fires of fury
and despair. Smash windows.
To die among tree roots, alone. The numbers dead in
the American Civil War, fallen in each battle, in World
War One, World War Two. Each war has its name. The
unification of Italy brought an end to the wars between
city-states. But what of the border between Italy and
Austria? Finally one great tongue will lap it all up.
There’s a gopher digging up my bit of garden. I save my
piss to pour it down its entranceways, hoping he or she
will hate it and leave. The tick still sucks my blood. Is a
virus alive? The sun cares not.
Each night I stand at my front window and wait to see
cars go by, can see only the roofs of cars over the raised
blinds. One car from north to south, another, another,
maybe one white one from south to north, I hear them
coming and passing by my front door. The people in the
cars are awake. I will soon be asleep.
I don’t think I miss sexuality. But I miss sleeping within
the warmth of a consort. When I think of it, imagine the
intimacy, it’s stunningly profound.
Forms of life reproduce beyond their number, eat at each
other’s edges, develop strategies. Flagella, gunpowder,
hydrogen, surveillance. Living high off the neighbor’s hog.
Deposing the neighbor’s elected leaders to support
dictators who will profit from our profit.
24 CONTACT QUARTERLY
WINTER/SPRING 2020
I am two people. I stand up from the pull of gravity. If you
slip and fall, if it’s funny, I laugh. If I see your knife slip deep
into your finger, I tense my chin and feel that nameless
twinge around my sex.
There’s always a smell. If I stop and take note of the smell
in any moment, there’s always a smell. And you know
tinnitus? I have that with smell. Hard to describe, subtle.
If it were sound, it would be a drone with variations.
Toasted bread, earth, tree bark, that family of smells.
Like layers of an onion, kindness within the family. To
have offspring, their heads force through the birth canal.
The predator culls the herd. To see the apples fallen about
the tree where the horses can munch on them, maybe get
a bit high.
She sits, leaning into him, his arm around her, half asleep.
They’ve spent the night together, in each other’s body.
To hold back from war, with thousands marching for
peace. Self-image. Profit. Living high off your neighbor’s
acorns, petroleum, sugar cane. The decency of peace.
The Art of War written by Sun Tzu some two thousand
years ago. And the suffering.
I live some hundred yards east of the 405 Freeway. I can
see a rectangle of sunset sky framed between the Federal
Building and another. A single palm etched against the
brightness and the occasional uppermost sliver of a
faraway car passing north.
Last night I shouted myself awake. I had been floating
upward toward a cabin in the sky, a man floating after
me. Then I was in the cabin and someone said, “Watch
out. He’ll attack.” “No, why would he do that?” Parts of the
cabin floating in unison, I open the door and there he is.
William Carlos Williams. Improvisations, early writing. He
writes a paragraph unintelligible that soaks in like water,
then follows it with one of explanation just as unintelligi-
ble. Thirsty. Thirsty for the next paragraph. And the next.
As more and more disruption of water, earth, air, many
will go under the bus. It will be accomplished through
dictatorships. Justice will be reduced to acts of kindness.

Split-second images of pristine factory interiors brightly
lit and deserted except for two technicians consulting
about the so desirable product, scenes of domestic green
and colorful with flowers, grandparents, dogs, impossible
leaps into space, while the rich need only a fraction of
yesterday’s labor force. And what of the vote?
The word “love,” all the combinations of goings-on. That
one with a certain carriage, a certain look, talking with
those others.
I heard a leader of the white supremacists say, “The Jews
are the virus. Blacks and homosexuals are the symptoms.”
Forget the lack of logic. It’s a feeling. When I lived in
Vermont I sat with my cat to watch the evening darken,
me on the stone step, her on the woodpile. The impulse
from the far distant past to extend a special morsel to a
family member, to a friend, to a stranger.

On March 9, 2019, Steve Paxton visited the opening weekend of Steve Paxton: Drafting
Interior Techniques, a retrospective exhibition of his work and legacy held at Culturgest in
Lisbon, Portugal. The exhibition was dedicated to the inner experiences of the dancers, inviting
the audience to nap, meditate-while-standing (aka small dance), and every Sunday to practice
Contact Improvisation in a studio we had carved out within the walls of the museum. It also
presented videos of Steve’s early pieces from the Judson era, Grand Union performances, and
Contact Improvisation, as well as installations based on Material for the Spine, a wall of the
complete back issues of Contact Quarterly, and videos of Steve performing the Goldberg
Variations, PA RT, and many other solo and group works.
That evening, Jurij Konjar restaged Satisfyin Lover, a piece Steve made in 1968 for 42
ordinary people to cross the stage and sit, walk, or stand; and FLAT, a solo from 1964. Jurij also
improvised to J.S. Bach’s The Goldberg Variations interpreted by Glenn Gould, inspired by a solo
that Steve performed from 1986 to 1992.
The next day, Steve gave a two-hour talk in Culturgest’s grand auditorium at the invitation
of Liliana Courtinho (Talks Curator for Culturgest). What follows is excerpted from his talk.


Steve Paxton. Well…[bringing
his chair to the edge of the stage, looking
at the audience].
So here you are. Against all
obstacles, here you are.
How did you do it?
When I think of an audience
and the man-hours that it takes to
prepare to go out and sit in a theatre—
all the arrangements that it takes,
the scheduling, the calendars, the
baby-sitters, the shopping, the
clothes—the clothes alone must take
hours and hours.
Just give them their weight.
I wanted to speak today with
young dancers, if they came.
Just to say, first of all, that the
route to becoming a dancer is a long
one. And this is because you have to
grow the information: you don’t get
the information; what you get is a
ten-year course, in which you have
to change your body; you have to
actually develop, grow, direct your
own growth and be directed by your
teachers into a different body.
The reason for this is that the
dances we [Western dancers] dance
work with projection, or extension,
or stretch, or pointing—the extremes
of the geometry of the body. I don’t
know why we’ve done that, except
that for a theatre like the one we are
in right now—I could make intimate
gestures here on stage that might not
carry to the top row. Maybe that’s the
case, maybe as theatres got bigger,
the dance became grander. But, at
any rate, it seems we have invented
something that no other dance had
ever done. It is quite an invention.
What does it mean to have an
invention in movement? In human
growth? In the development of what
we become? I don’t know if I can
answer this question.
Each culture invents its art,
and we don’t know exactly the rules
behind that. We know what we’ve
done. We can see it. We’ve heard
about it. For instance, the story of
modern dance coming to counter the
power of ballet. Or so I was told, even
though I don’t think it’s really true.
I mean modern dance was as much
dependent on ballet as Lisbon is
dependent on Ancient Greece: it
was a basis. And yet, with the modern
dance came a new idea, the idea that
it didn’t have to be a universal dance,
that it could be a personal dance.
When it came to my generation, I
assessed the situation this way: my
teacher, Merce Cunningham, did not
do what he was taught, he went on to
find a new thing to do; his teacher,
Martha Graham, did not do what she
was taught, she found, or she invented
a new way to do it; her teachers, Ruth
St Denis and Ted Shawn, did not do
what their idol, Isadora Duncan, had
done; and Isadora did not do what
anybody had done.
This is a very interesting
sequence, and it happened in all the
modern arts. It meant that there
was a lot of responsibility on partly
trained, immature, aspiring, hopeful
artists to invent something new as
they were developing, as they were
still being developed by their teach-
ers. In a way, their resistance had to
be grown at the same time, so they
did not simply become a copy of what


they were taught. This responsibility
is that they had to become like the
phoenix, coming out of the ashes
of the previous art forms. But it
couldn’t be the same phoenix: a
new bird had to come.
So that was weird. That’s the
situation we were in. That’s why I
don’t encourage anyone to be a dancer,
because this is going to be a hard
climb. But if you do, just know that
it’s going to take you a long time to
mature, and you have to be patient
with yourself, and you will have to
go to these classes. You don’t have
to like a class, you have to go to it
regularly to get your body strong.
Plus, that will be a basis for your
health for the rest of your life—
so, you know—why not?
Now, is there something out
there to find? Have we found it all?
Doesn’t it feel like that? There are so
many people and they are so different.
Well, where I live—I live on
a farm—there is a kitchen with a
window facing south onto a gentle
hill and a tree. In the spring, grass
grows there, the tree has blossoms.
In the winter, it is snow—we’re very
far north in Vermont—and the trees
are bare. Naked, cold trees. And I
look out everyday, and I feel some-
thing. I have been there for fifty

years, looking out this window, more
or less. I feel something, and what I
feel is the molecules of that hillside.
After all this time, my vision—not my
actual eyes—my vision is saying: this
place is alive. Every bit of it is alive.
The dirt is alive. The plants are alive.
Every molecule is transforming into
something else. They get to a certain
point, they start to decay, they trans-
form to something else, they come
up again, the cycle is happening, it’s
molecular. I’m seeing it on a molecu-
lar level. These molecules are not set
in stones. These molecules are adapt-
ing and changing. A trillion changes
are happening at any one time in my
yard. And they’re not all happening
in the same way that they’ve already
happened. The changes are adapting,
they are adapting a little bit into
something else.
I’m talking about evolution, in
a way; I’m talking about evolution
in miniature, I’m talking about our
atoms, our molecules, changing.
We know they do, we know they’ve
changed, even though you feel the
same, even though I feel the same, as
me, as you, you know you’ve changed.
You are not who you used to be. Nor
will you stay who you are now.
This is so scary: what am I about
to say next? I don’t know.

But, what I have said so far seems
to suggest that you have some ability
to guide what you become as you
change. The change is going to happen.
You have a choice. If you want to be a
dancer, you do the classes. I suggest
you do the classes. You don’t have
to. I know one dancer, Simone Forti,
who didn’t do the classes, but she
is such a genius. I used to see her
in Cunningham classes. She was
trying to do the classes, and after
the classes I would see her on her
hands and knees, crawling. I knew
that she needed one more thing,
something simple and straightfor-
ward, something basic to ground
herself again. She is somebody that
tasted the dance techniques but was
not adapted, or compliant enough;
too stubborn, maybe. And that’s how
she went on developing her own work
and ended up at a place that I would
consider shamanistic.
It’s altogether a rather strange
thing to do, to take a body and to turn
it into an art thing. It’s one thing to
make art of bodies, of people fighting,
of lovers twisting—to make a picture
of it. But to do art with it, what a
strange thing. And dance is particu-
larly strange because movement is so
hard to understand and to describe.

I think that’s the reason why in
dance techniques they simplify it, so
when you study a dance technique,
you are studying a small area of what
movement can be. And if you are then
to study martial arts, or Tai Chi, or
folk dance, you have then a different
slice of human movement. What I
saw in Bali, nothing of my dance
was there to be seen.
So is there more? I think more
is evolving. I think we are evolving.
I think you have to evolve. There’s all
kinds of evolution. There’s what you
do in your life by yourself, as a solo
evolver—that’s your work. There’s
you and your friends, a group of you,
how you think, what you think, what
you agree on, how you present work
maybe. There’s the larger culture,
gradually moving on. We are all
evolving.
Now I would like to show a few
videos that appear in the exhibition.
And the first I want to show is Smiling,
a dance I made to reflect on facial
expressions in contemporary cultures.
In Rome, in 1969, the piece was pre-
sented with State, a dance where
people stood still, and Satisfyin Lover,
a dance which you saw yesterday,
where people walk, stand, and sit.
I wanted to see what these look
like on stage, I wanted to see these
performed, I wanted to see standing
performed, not just to happen. I
wanted to see it performed to honor
it, but also to see what would happen
to people doing it. To walk naturally,
which is what they are supposed to do
in Satisfyin Lover, is not easily done.
When I settled upon walking as
an artistic formula or medium, I was
looking for something ancient in the
body, I was looking for something
not of the culture, but before culture,
back to times we could only imagine,
and I think walking was a good choice.
It’s an obvious thing, we do it all the
time. To put it on the stage is what
our culture does: a microscope on
walking, on the people who are walk-
ing, on the fact of walking, standing,
and sitting. Just as one strata of what
the body does.
I am sure you all know that to be
bipedal, to be walking standing up
like this, is not the most normal way
of moving on the Earth and relating
to gravity. It gives us the potential
of using the arms in various ways,
but it is unusual. The uprightness
allows for the head to be at the top of
the body, which means that there is
about seven pounds of mass up there.
Playing with that point of balance
around which we are switching sides,
head to torso, changing the way
weight falls through the body, and
suddenly we are in ballet, suddenly
we are in Java.…
I have written a little book
called Gravity 1. The reason gravity
is important to me as a thought
form is that gravity is what keeps
the body true. And by “true” I mean
in the sense of carpentry: the fall of
a weight on a string makes its line
straight. The fall of our weight in the
body has the same effect. The fall of
the organs into the pelvis helps give
us a basis. We can unnecessarily pull
those organs back up and hold the
weight high—into a kind of paralysis.
But we can also let them fall. In that

case, it is as though our freedom
was based on our acceptance of its
opposite.
Evolution takes a long time and
happens in small elements.
For young dancers, despair not.
We modestly say: we have only begun
to understand, we may not have even
begun yet. There’s lots of chaos and
evolution that we have yet to find and
somebody in this room, somebody in
this city, has such potential of devel-
opment that they can bring and show
us something else.
I think that’s all I have to say.
Thank you for coming.
Oh, yes, there’s a possibility for
questions.
Liliana Courtinho. In one of
the videos of the exhibition [... in a
non-wimpy way... an interview with
Steve by Bojana Cvejic and Lennart
Laberenz], you are in your dance
studio in your farm in Northern
Vermont and you say, “This is where
I cultivate my pessimism.” And so I
wondered: today, you seemed quite
optimistic. Where do you stand now,
between those two options?
Steve Paxton. I thought I was
an optimist for many years, but I met
a man in Amsterdam, in an interview
situation, and he asked me a question
that I thought was so stupid, something
along the lines of “don’t you think
things are getting better?” At that
point, I was much younger than I
am now, but I was already at an age
where I could say: I know things are
just not getting better, and I don’t
know what to do about it. So I said
to him, No, I don’t things are getting
better. What about the police, what
about education, what about nurses,
where have you been? Have you been
under a rock all your life?
I realized at that moment that
I was very pessimistic. This was
saddening to me. But I also realized:
well, being an optimist doesn’t seem
to have worked, it doesn’t seem to
have helped improve anything; I have
been told that it’s a good thing but
who knows? And so I tried to be a
pessimist and see how that worked,
or see what its conditions were. I have
been living under these conditions
now for some time. It’s a bitter victory.
It’s somehow a little bit healthier to
hope that things will improve than to
have the bitter confirmation that you
are right, that they will not improve.
But I’m waiting for the next turn:
if I changed once, I am sure I can
change again, if I can find evidence
that something is improving. So:
stay tuned.
Vera Mantero. Steve, you spent
a lot of time in your life building
and devising very complex, and
sometimes mysterious, systems to
improvise. Why is it important for
you to improvise and to create
conditions, complicated conditions,
to improvise? And I am not thinking
here about Contact Improvisation,
I’m thinking for example of the work
you did with Lisa Nelson, [Nightstand],
in which you were exchanging various
kinds of objects; I’m thinking of
systems that you built in order to
do something that you don’t know
at first what it’s going to be?
Steve Paxton. Well, first let me
tell you that this whole talk was, as
I think is pretty clear, an improvi-
sation. I worried about it, I thought
about it, I was impressed by the fact
it was going to happen, and that I
should prepare properly to meet
people who had come to seriously
listen, but I didn’t set it. It isn’t that
I don’t care. I hope I have delivered
something of substance. But I feel
that those things that can sponta-
neously arise when we’re together—
have more to do with a grace in the
room than with anything I am going
to deliver.
So this question of improvisation:
I think if you start to improvise, if
you start to inquire about improvisa-
tion, you will end up as I did, asking
yourself: “I would like to know what
improvisation is.” Of course it is not
possible to not ask this question,
but the minute you do that, you are
set back for a good couple of years.
Instead, I think what you need to do
is to look to your life, to look for those

little moments when maybe you can
observe yourself without noticing
that you are, and notice that you are
improvising all the time. You just
are, you can’t stop it, it’s part of
everything you do.
You simply don’t have enough
consciousness power to manufac-
ture all the events that you create.
Consciousness is like the finger here
[moving his index inside of his glass],
thinking: hmm, what is this glass?
What is this water? Hmm, interesting.
Consciousness. Meanwhile, all of this
[pointing to the rest of his body and
around him], the rest of me, is the
unconscious making the conditions
for this moment to happen, and let
this finger have its way in what it’s
interested in.
So, improvisation: how do you do
something that you don’t know you
are about to do? I think we should
eliminate any idea of freedom from
this discussion. There is no such
thing as freedom, there are always
conditions. You may disagree, but
if we are dealing with conditions, it
means we are dealing with things we
are not consciously dictating. This
is what we are doing all the time:
coping with situations reflexively,
or unthinkingly, or else exploring. I
haven’t decided yet what I am about
to do and as I am beginning to do it,
at some point I am going to make a
choice [extending his arms]: how did I
get here? That’s short enough that we
could examine it.
But if we’d get into a long Jurij
Konjar improvisation [to the Goldberg
Variations], like last night... It starts
off, and you get it for a while, and you
can still track it, but then you get lost
in the complexity of the doing, and
itjust goes on and on and you end up
with something that is a mountain
of detail, that you have somehow
absorbed. For those of you who didn’t
see it yesterday, let me just say that it
was incredibly articulate and intricate.
The body was coming apart and going
together in so many different ways
so fast sometimes that you could not
track, you could not see where the
movement was going to emerge next.
What directions he was going to go
into. A complexity. And that was
an hour.
I have a friend—Lisa Nelson.
She recently did a performance,
[End Plays, with Hijack, in New
York], in which the formula for the
performance was: one person makes
a proposal and then says when the
proposal stops, then the other per-
son makes a proposal and then says
when it stops. Three people were
ultimately doing this, probably mak-
ing a hundred and fifty proposals in
an hour, and in that time, the whole
stage was transformed. I mean lit-
erally transformed: the tables were
upside down, the chairs were moved,
the dancers had been everywhere
on the stage—and yet they were just
going through this little formula.
Gradually, from that formula, it got
to be an accumulation of detail, like
evolution of life on Earth leading to
something as particular and outra-
geous as [the Australian] Peacock
spider—something that wholly
transformed the situation. I felt like I

had taken a mushroom: my thought
process was recognizably hallucinat-
ing—from a performance!
I felt a little bit like that in the
performance last night as well. I
remember trying to keep hold of one
moment which was so beautiful, and
it kept changing, and then another
remarkable moment happened. What
had happened in between? Well, it
was too complex to know exactly, and
I was straining to recover a reality that
I had just lived through. It is quite a
state. A place of ambiguity and lack
of anchoring.
It works if you care. And Jurij
made me care. I have danced that
dance. I know that dance. I mean, not
that dance—we could have a discus-
sion here. That was his dance. But he
knows my dance, so somehow it is
our dance, to a degree. The question
of authorship of this dance has now
lost all rationality. We have been
talking for four or five years now
about how is he supposed to relate
to the fact that he is doing a dance
I did, and yet he is doing his dance.
How does he do it?
Such an interesting question:
how does one decide...? I think it’s
something about play. You know how
it is, you decide, Oh let’s take the day
off, and let’s go to the beach, or let’s
go down to the park and run in the
grass. I think it’s something about
play, and it is a decision we can take.
If you go to a studio and you play and
you are serious enough to track what
you are doing.
If you want to improvise, you
have to be aware of the fact that
everything is evolving, nothing is
set—set meaning stopped, set mean-
ing undeveloped-beyond, which is
not how life seems to work. And yet,
it seems to be how culture works.
Culture is past-viewing. I mean, what
else could be agreed upon? You can’t
get a million people to agree on the
future. But you can get most of them
to agree on a certain version of the
past, and that becomes the culture,
and the artists of that culture are
those who are remembered, and stuff
like this museum show of my work is
produced. It’s the culture looking at
itself and deciding what are the
merits of something: Miró,
Gauguin, Picasso.
Improvisation. I think it is
something you can train yourself
to do, and look for the conditions
with which you want to do it. And
we also have to recognize that there
are some things for which planning
and order and sequencing are better
than improvisation for achieving. For
instance: don’t improvise your taxes.
Anonymous: I am not really a
dancer. I don’t have a dancing back-
ground established. I wonder: is there
a difference between movement and
dance? What did your experience,

Steve Paxton: Well I can say
this: I am perfectly willing to eliminate
the word “dance” from language if
it would help clarify matters. I don’t
think we can do without the word
“movement.” But I think we could get
along without the word “dance.”
How the word “dance” is useful
is when people are trying to express
the state or the change of state that
ten years of study, and the focus on a
certain aesthetic, produces in a body.
Maybe in my mind I call it a
dance because of the perspective
that I have. And if that’s a perspective
that others don’t have, I am willing to
give up the fight. All I want to do is to
expand the extent of consciousness. I
know that the brain has many priori-
ties, and that our casual movement is
not part of its high priorities. I know
that with walking, especially if you
are walking and thinking about what’s
on your list, the mechanism of how
you are getting yourself to where
you are going is not a priority. That’s
what got me wondering: how does
my body do it? How does it get me
around? What is the support system
to which I don’t ever give a holiday?
Sure, sometimes I take it out to eat,
give it a good dinner. But still, that
unacknowledged thing that we have
to support the “me” that you think
you are, I think of that as a dance.
And if I think of that as a dance, I
can think of the minutia of that
small dance, of those tiniest little
movements.
u
To read the full transcript of
Steve’s talk, go to CQ Unbound
on www.contactquarterly.com
For more information on the exhibition,
you can obtain the catalogue, Steve
Paxton: Drafting Interior Techniques,
available on booksonthemove.eu. The
exhibition will be travelling to Azkuna
Centroa in Bilbao, Spain, from February

At the invitation of choreographer/curator Meg Stuart, I created a six-part text for Tanzkongress 2019
held June 5–10 at the Festspielhaus Hellerau, in Dresden, Germany. TK2019, subtitled A Long Lasting
Affair, offered a communal and praxis-based approach to contemporary questions in dance. TK2019 received
significant funding from the German Federal Cultural Foundation and included workshops and creative
propositions to 600 participants.
Excerpted here are three sections from the text, which I performed with collaborative commentary from
a group of invited artists, already in attendance at TK2019. Designed as a dancing-word manifesto—five
parts with script and one entirely improvised—I read each section and then turned to the invited artists for
their elaboration/response. We discussed ideas with one another and with the other attendees. Then we all
moved about in the immense grand hall while stagehands manipulated beautiful, massive tables, designed
by Doris Dziersk, into novel arrangements for each section.
Sections in order of presentation: anthropocene :: aesthetics :: globalizations :: queer entanglements
:: fear-mongering :: shame.
Invited artists included Salamata Kobré, Stephany Ursula Yamoah, Fatou Cissé, Ligia Lewis, Trajal Harrell,
Dana Michel, Jens Giersdorf, Eike Wittrock, Sonya Lindfors, Niall Jones, Ni’Ja Whitson, Keith Hennessy,
Ishmael Houston-Jones, and Joy Mariama Smith. —T.DF.
[1]
we move, too much, too quickly, too often. we forget to
care. we aren’t nearly so clever as we thought we would be.
our future is not promised. but then, the future has always
been Black.
the [Black] anthropocene
we start with the planet. often, we claim indigeneity. the
people who came before. the ancestors as destiny. in the
united states we do this more and more. the event begins
with the calling forth of the ground. and the people who
came before. we write it down on our websites; we try to
learn to pronounce the names. but the planet rebels. we
see the problem, immediately. the past is fucked up. but
we get nowhere by ignoring it.
the past is fucked up. full of missteps and things we think
we want to do better. contemporary performance is
supposedly a new new, a politicized version of what came
before, possibly designed with the planet in mind. what
could a performance be that actually considered, say,
carbon footprint or generations of genocide? well, not this
one. we gather here in Dresden with a huge footprint and
as though the fact of social and political disavowals and

exclusions matter little, or not enough to slow us even
more. we move too fast. the anthropocene offers dis-
course for the turn to the inevitable self-centeredness that
characterizes too much of contemporary performance. in
the anthropocene our gestures matter, because they pay
forward to a world that actually cares about what we do,
here and now. the caring is a by-product of necessity:
species are wiped out because we build a new performance
center; there is crass exploitation of materials to make
a “great show” with an extravagant mise-en-scene—live
animals; decaying sod; an entire building destroyed before
your very eyes. in the anthropocene we take the lead by
doing things: dancing, shitting onstage and fucking,
trying to elicit empathetic response.
the anthropocene fully embraces the performative turn.
what and how become one; what we do and how we do it
indicate the terms of understanding our influences, inter-
ferences, and entanglements. things are dark. melting
ice, flooded lands, forced migrations as places become
unlivable. well, unlivable for us, now, at least. clean water,
which was only ever a nominal affordance of the planet,
is now disrupted beyond measure by a reliance on plastic
and oil, energy coerced to a mass scale.

but we still resist the potential of small performances,
small intimacies, privacies not distended but rather
cared for as minor gestures. we still build hierarchies and
big-up toward celebrity and notoriety. we move too fast.
we want—and the wanting becomes solipsistic desire for
approval, affirmation, and acknowledgment of my pain;
the me of me, what happened to me?, what I know, what
I figured out, what I can do, watch me work, get out of
my way.
mentoring, teaching, responding to younger artists; we
witness the wanting to matter. emerging artists want to
be seen and regarded. the anthropocene tells us that we
all matter, but we can’t believe that. the anthropocene
offers evidence in unprecedented weather: fires, tornados,
heat waves, droughts, floods. all at once. in response to
what we do. in the age of human intervention in climate.
the anthropocene turns us toward destruction, a self-
immolation born of all this need and want. as artists
and critics, we rank among the neediest of all, wanting
others to care that we can shake, scream, stretch, or
refuse to acknowledge someone else’s concerns no
matter the movement at hand. we author this anthropo-
cene willingly; creating, making, making over, re-doing,
doing. trying to be noticed, noticeable, worthy.
and we want strangers to care. that seems a lot to ask.
a Black anthropocene might recognize the inevitability
of change as necessary to a life cycle. as inevitable as an
inherent lack of control over one’s physical trajectory,
even when things seem sort of okay. for Black people,
the anthropocene is a bit like payback being a bitch: you
can jack off all you want, but at some point, your body
won’t produce fluids or much more than pain. the planet
hurts, as it tries to sustain all of the growing populace’s
unquenchable desires. Black pain, though, is inevitable,
and sacrifice comes before any sense of identity or
identity politic.
the future has always been black as the population grows,
and we fail to comprehend and act on questions of scale.
do we really need to be global artists, showing work on six
continents? what could it mean to explore a lighter touch,
to resist piling on to the jockstraps and menstrual blood
of famous artists from before? or the tyrannies of fake
reenactment and vacuous historicizing that reifies a fake
caring about false pasts? the planet rebels. will we scorch
the sky?
the anthropocene wonders if we will accelerate its terms
simply because we can’t figure out how to do any better.
or, if we might acknowledge its constant shadow that
expands as we leak our desire into rank unruliness. we
participate in it willy-nilly; especially when we dance to
prove supremacy.
a Black anthropocene is, of course, art-making. daily lives
made up of valuing gesture and detail, noting change,
growth, and variety as a way of being present now. survival
as an outgrowth of willful creativity. working Black means

working willfully towards a structured obsolescence, one
that will destroy the category that defines it if all goes well.
we work toward the end of a need for Black, but only as
Black becomes what we are all willing to be, what we are
all able to be, what we all might understand in some way.
we’ve already scorched the earth and each other trying to
dominate. the anthropocene is about human domination,
but a Black anthropocene could be about making our way
back towards each other, valuing history as possibility
and a way to share current circumstances. the people who
came before left because they had to. we’ll have to, soon,
as well. but we don’t have to leave our marks. i don’t think
we do. we could learn to listen. shhhh.
what is to be done? how do we move toward an alongside-
ness or an adjacency that allows for expansion, rather
than only constrictions?
[3]
we move, too much, too quickly, too often. we forget to
care. we aren’t nearly so clever as we thought we would be.
our future is not promised. but then, the future has always
been Black.
photo © Charlotte Spichalsky
globalizations
it’s amazing that we are from all over. that we can gather,
however briefly, just long enough to see each other and
share tales of woe. the future is black, we tell each other,
but then the future has always been Black.
in traveling we learn something of difference, really; of the
orderliness of one place and the abundant chaos of another,
as in the Tanzkongress here, of the messiness of social
strains in one neighborhood next to the leafy green happi-
ness of a children’s space near the bar. traveling, we can
take the time to notice that these venues are similar but
unique; that audiences are not undifferentiated masses.
that it matters who turns up to see or be involved in the
performance, and it matters who will never come see the
show. as the planet’s population expands, every day there
are more and more people who will never witness our
creative explorations or wonder at the questioning through
performance that drives our devotions to dance.
thinking globally means shifting our attention toward the
difficult considerations of scale that trouble our under-
standings of planet, climate, entanglement. these are not
simple concerns to hold. when we are in the dance studio
in the small town outside of Berlin, or in Helsinki, what
does that have to do with the people chaining themselves
to a police station in Oakland as a performance of defiance
to a rising police state? What does me practicing yoga, or
dancing salsa, have to do with religious and racial conflict
in Sri Lanka?

globalization as a process encourages us to forget
difference and settle into a numbing sameness, where
every dance is available so long as it can be subsumed
into a locale that denies its specificities. yes, we can yoga at
Hellerau, and we can kathak in Santiago, and of course
tango in Copenhagen. globalization needs to create smooth
terrain that allows for a simultaneity and a sameness,
promised as an availability and access for all—well, for
those who have time and the resources/privilege to
spend energy on other people’s stuff.

and globalization is something about eating the other,
to quote an older academic text; it might be a leaning in
toward desire for difference, and especially an exoticized
difference that stays unknown and out of proximity. we
need things to be different in order to rhapsodize over
their superficial contents; we need to be able to not really
know what’s going on in the Bronx in order to fetishize
and become expert voguers in Hamburg.
we forget to care. but we think we can try, and we gather
from hither and yon, and we have salons and mini-confer-
ences, and we meet, and we imagine that we communicate
and connect even when it is sloppy and ill-advised but
we are all artists here, and that must mean that we share
something about a willingness to be outside a mainstream,
and we must be able to meet there, here, in a place beyond
place, an imaginary place of a long-lasting affair, but an
affair, not a marriage, with the asymmetries bared through
time, but an affair to remember, a being with where the
ground could tremble because we try and we want, we want
it to work, we want it to be possible a bit, that we could be
alongside each other and not just eat each other up.
but then, we would have to learn to listen. and to notice.
and to allow for globalization to mean more difficult
conversations and discourse, not just more varied. some
of us need to fight in our everyday at home, to fight hard
while others of us don’t. we’re not aligned just because we
are in the same room. we have to fight to actually be here
together, in our differences that we fight to maintain.
in creating “global-aware” spaces, like this year’s Tanz-
kongress, so much—so very much—has to be disregarded
and elided. for this event to even happen, we have to pre-
tend that it is okay to be called into the room and to come
forth; to represent without representing; to be Black and
awash in difference even as we are all artists here. this is
the promise of a Black future, though, that this could be
possible. watch us closely. we meet here, and bring ourselves,
yes, but can also demonstrate how to leave so much behind,
out of reach and unavailable; to leave the Black home at
a distance and still survive, smile, make bookings, and
dance. we do this all the time, and demonstrate that it can
be done. globalization is possible, and a weird Black other
can still be produced inside of it. at what cost? that we
don’t yet know, not really.
are all ideas really available to us all? which people fall out
of these emergent “global orderings?”
what is to be done? how do we move towards an alongside-
ness or an adjacency that allows for expansion rather than
only constrictions?
[5]
we move, too much, too quickly, too often. we forget to
care. we aren’t nearly so clever as we thought we would be.
our future is not promised. but then, the future has always
been Black

when Obama was elected, we noted that gun sales in the
US increased exponentially, supposedly because some
americans assumed that laws against guns would finally
be strengthened a bit; that didn’t happen, and instead
we’ve just seen more and more mass shootings as more
fancy and unexpected firearms find their way to a general
public. after Obama left office my husband suggested we
arm ourselves against the coming deluge. be afraid. be
very afraid.
in France the security at the performances has heightened
after Paris, after Nice, after Berlin; we stand in line for bag
searches and spot checks; if the company is from Israel we
are handled more roughly. we wait in long lines. i don’t feel
any safer. the people hired to secure our space are afraid
too; and maybe they have done this before, this guarding
the audience at the dance concert, or the theater, but
they didn’t survive Paris, or Nice, or Berlin at christmas,
because if they had they wouldn’t be here, this is no way
to live no way to make a living no way to go see a show
that means to uplift us because the world is scary and of
course a performance will take that away, take away the
pain, offer a vista of something else. why would the per-
formance just heap more fear and anxiety and confusion
onto something already wrecked, already scary? we need
the dance to remind us of grace, and goodwill among
men, but that’s not allowed, I’m afraid, it’s not allowed
to be an experimental artist who doesn’t experiment; be
afraid that there is less and less space to be an artist who
pleases the public, but who ever wanted to please the
public? those are the wannabe fake artists who are really
entertainers who want the people to feel good about them-
selves; that is not allowed, it is not allowed to feel safe in
the theater or in the improvisation; it is not allowed to feel
good about yourself, only yourself, because who does that?
we are afraid. we move too fast, and too often, afraid to
fly or crash land, afraid of the terrorists on the train or in
the theater; or at the music concert in Las Vegas or on the
beach in Ivory Coast.
what are you afraid of?

that there won’t be a job, there isn’t a job; that the hier-
archies that keep some people in place will never move,
the old people will never retire, we will be stuck. I will be
stuck. the old people keep coming back and there’s no room
for me for me for meeeeeee to find myself as an artist as
a maker as an interpreter, as me not you. I’m afraid that
I won’t be able to be me, because you’ll be in the way.
you’re always in the way, the world keeps changing the
game keeps changing. we move too fast. it doesn’t change
enough. we waste time with our elders when we should be
just doing shit ourselves, because we want to. i want to. do
shit. my own shit. i’m afraid you won’t let me do my own
shit. who are you to me?
why do i have to know about you? why should i care? i’m
afraid to care, i’m afraid i’ll never fall in love, and i’ll never
have a relationship i can recognize, i want a fuckmate who
will always be there ready to fuck, ready to love i mean. i’m
afraid there won’t be anyone, there will only be #metoo,
and i will be one of the three who are sexually assaulted
among us, look left look right, one of we three, i’m afraid
to be one of the three and that i won’t have health care,
i won’t have an abortion, it’s not allowed in the united
states, it’s not allowed anymore. i’m afraid i can’t raise
a child i’m afraid i can’t afford, there are no jobs, i won’t
be able to live somewhere long term, i don’t think long
term. i’m afraid there’s no contingency plan that promises
tomorrow, tomorrow is not promised.
tomorrow was never promised. Black lives matter. except
when they don’t, usually. i’m afraid i don’t understand race
the way the americans talk about it. i don’t understand.
i’m afraid i don’t care.
i’m afraid of a tomorrow without.
without any of the things of today, which is already fucked
up, but here we are, i’m afraid of a tomorrow that can’t
possibly make any sense unless it’s more of the bullshit
that we have now and here and here and now, that we
already know is broken but we pretend that it’s sort of
okay even though lots of us are camping in tents on the
muddy ground outside of here, but there are African
refugees who can’t even get into here and we should all
just fucking be done with it and fucking move to fucking
Poland. just move. just move.
what is to be done? how do we move towards an alongside-
ness or an adjacency that allows for expansion rather than
only constrictions?

re-mapping. and afterwards, a turn toward a future looking
that includes Black looks. The Future Has Always Been
Black. dark and unknowable, fugitive, on the move, shifting
and smarter than any of us ever thought. Black life.
The Future Has Always Been Black. Strategies of resistance
and outsiderness, embedded into the heinous construction
of this world. Black exists because it has to, as an alterity,
a truth, an inevitability. and as how people navigate the
world. we Black people.
The Future Has Always Been Black. The Future Has Always Been Black.

How did you get to this point?
We were supposed to meet in Vienna during the 6th
IDOCDE (International Documentation of Contem-
porary Dance Education) Symposium1 called You are here,
hosted at ImPulsTanz Festival Vienna 2018. Leading up to
the symposium, we were invited for a weeklong residency
called Mind the Dance. The theme of the residency was
artistic and reflective practices in dance documentation.
One of us didn’t make it to Vienna. To this day, we have
actually never physically met, but nonetheless, we have
been collaborating since the initial point of the residency.
What came out of this initial “never meeting” during the
residency at ImPulsTanz?
Well, resonating with the overall theme of the symposium
(You are here), the physical distance between you and me
shaped our collective research: 2 How were we going to
collaborate without ever physically meeting? After our
first sessions—conducted through Skype, email, and
WhatsApp—we determined a time frame, possible scores,
and tasks for the project. We distilled our conversations
and experiences into the following topics: Absence of
the other, Fiction of the other, and Space in between
each other.
• Absence
What does a trace tell us about a missing process?
How do we create and feel together in the absence of
the others?
Can we wonder and wander 3 with an absence of direction
or specific intent?
Do we need to see/sense traces of one who is absent in order
to experience them?
• Fiction
Allows me to imagine the place you are in, which bridges the
gap/absence/in-between-ness of another
• Space in between
Like the suspended leg before the next step
Inspired by The Go-To How-To Book of Anarchiving,
4 we
approached these key topics anarchivally. Rather than
documenting the content of the event, anarchival pro-
cesses capture traces of the event’s liveness, which might
set the stage for a next event to occur. We thought of
movement tasks and perception scores that could be
performed simultaneously in our respective spaces. We
documented, traced, and recorded them. The traces of
these tasks and scores led the research process into new
processes, becoming a digital/virtual/tactile collage of
what happened.
A Movement Score
Move in the memory of someone else’s actions…
You have not seen this/these person(s), nor their actions.
You have never been close physically to this/these person(s).
You haven’t inhabited the same place.
Yet you are sharing the same process.
Wander and wonder…
For 6 or 60 minutes
Thank you for sharing your process. And how did you
communicate your research with the public during the
IDOCDE symposium?
As a form of presentation, we invited participants
from the IDOCDE symposium to step into our ongoing
research. We set up the space with a 4 x 5m live projection
of you (who joined the whole session via Skype) and an
anarchival pathway on the floor consisting of the printed
pages of The Go-To How-To Book of Anarchiving. Scores
stemming from our research and written on colored cards
led and guided the group into a participatory anarchival
process by which participants created new traces and
lived in the becoming of those events and its traces. It is
important to mention that all anarchival processes have
some sort of sharing.

Research presentation score
Wonder and wander for…
Enter the space separately.
Prepare your space. Prepare the space. Or start the process.
Make the choice to discover the whole space or your
own space.
Make choices as a result of other people’s choices.
Leave the space or enter a new space.
Focus on distinct senses.
At any moment you can observe (active reception) or
contribute (active generation).
Attend to the moments when there is some “thing”
crystallizing.
Be aware when you are “ feeling” (experiencing) and when
you are “performing your feeling” (making visible your
experience).
Collect artifacts and bring them into the space.
You are always part of the score/event, no matter if you are
“in” or “out” of the space in which the event is being held.
As mentioned above, traces have become essential for your
research. Can you describe more precisely what you mean
when you talk about traces?
Traces are, in essence, an anarchive of experiences that
cannot be fully possessed due to their ephemerality but
can be impulses to push the research further. In an
anarchival sense, traces are the tip of the iceberg. A
trace is multiple:
A trace is formless memory (of an event).
A trace is a mediator in the proof of our existence for another.
A trace is a container, a snapshot, leftover coffee drips on the
edge of a paper cup.
A trace limits the past’s unlimited potential to unfold in
the future.
Our lives are composed of traces, outlines, pathways,
images, sketches, memories, narratives.
Everything is a trace of something else. Not all traces are
meant to last forever.
It’s the letter left behind asking:
What makes you real? I want to challenge the limits of
getting closer and closer but not meeting. Maybe getting
closer is weaving a web with more and more connecting
strings. Getting closer is cumulative. Getting closer is to
become more and more relational to each other. What if
a body is defined by its capability to build relations with
other bodies?
And how did the idea come up to continue the project after
the residency?
We were enchanted with how to encounter another with-
out ever sharing the same time/space. Our imagination
and fictional projection of each other provided a potent
space to work from. After Deleuze and Derrida, who both
reconciled presence and absence no longer as opposites
but rather as a related and interchangeable pair,5 we
wondered: How do we move in the present absence of the
other where these binary terms actually switch roles and
absence becomes a different kind of presence? We
continued asking questions:
How can we trace each other’s absent movements?
How can we activate the other’s absence through
immaterial traces?
What does a trace tell us about the other’s absence?
What do we share in the other’s absence?
What is the physicality of absence?

From this point, we needed to find shared tasks/objects
that served as connecting mediators. We set up collective
reading times. We picked the same book—in this case,
Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind by Yuval Noah
Harari—to read at the same time, in separate places.
We created a “30-day/30-second dance” score. Every day,
individually, we instantly composed a 30-second dance
and filmed it. We then sent these dances to each other.
We sent unfinished stories via post for each other to finish.
These collected and created traces became the material to
continue the forward-feeding process for our performance
installation in Amsterdam, also called You are here.
Would you describe the set-up for the performance
installation You are here?
In January 2019, we had the opportunity to share our
research with passersby in a semi-public performance
space in the de Pijp neighborhood of Amsterdam.6 Since
we were both in Amsterdam, our spatial proximity was
increasing. We inhabited the same exhibition space (a former
shop window) separately at different times over a period
of five days, for five hours each day. First, you would
inhabit for two and a half hours. I would come in after you
had left, for another two and a half hours. We’d continue
this cycle each day. The shop window served as a threshold
of in-betweenness from inside to outside, from private to
public. It allowed for transparency to flow between inner
and outer spaces. Each day we arranged and rearranged
objects, materials, and our bodies; we wrote letters and
left notes for each other; we used different materials, like
chalk, string, tape, and paper, while performing in and
with the present absence of the other. Our performances
accumulated material and immaterial traces of each
other’s absence. Words became a medium to describe
the visibility of one and the invisibility of the other.
Wait a second, you just mentioned that written and
spoken words became a medium to connect to each
other’s absence. Can you further elaborate on that?
Sure. Let’s say in language there are always multiple voices
that weave through time continuums of present, past, and
future. Reading your notes, memories, or stories articulated
your past through my present/future. Your thoughts
expanded in reverberation with my body’s presence. They
vibrated through my skin. They vibrated through space
and through the architecture of the window. As I project
into your future, you sit in my past.
And what about movement? How did you expand your
bodily presence into the presence of each other’s absence?
Sometimes moving in stillness was my only response;
sometimes I moved by imagining how you might have
moved before me. But indeed, moving in the memory of
someone you have never met—or moving with an inten-
tion of layering movements upon the absence of another—
was quite challenging. Through the material traces you
left behind, I tried to imagine your immaterialized body
choreographies. I found myself measuring my body in
order for you to have a sense of my size. Maybe that could
be the closest trace of my physicality. The performance
space was filled with pieces of string naming body parts
or the relation between body parts—connecting points,
separating surfaces. Connecting us? Movements them-
selves are untraceable. How do I leave movements behind,
untethered to any trace, piece of paper, string, chalk,
or words? How to move in, from, and with the present
absence of the other?

Do you want to share any other insights you had during the
performance or its reverberations?
In line with Derrida’s conception of presence and absence
as something beyond a static binary “that once connected
presence to an absolute truth or origin, and absence to
imitation or copy,”7 I experienced absence and presence
as being in a blurry, occasionally confusing relationship
with each other—not defined by opposition. Rather, they
are layered into each other; they are autonomous from
each other as much as they are not; absence and presence
do not follow linear measurements. Absence activates
different experiences of time. As I am writing you this
letter, I project into your future. When you read the letter,
you sit in my past. Since we developed shared tasks that
happened at the same time but in different places, and in
the same place but at different times, we swam in the sea
of temporalities, where past, present, and future actions
merged, overlapped, and intertwined.
During the five-day performance, both of you were staying
in Amsterdam. What would have happened if you had
accidently bumped into each other?
I guess we would have turned around and run away as fast
as possible. I can also imagine that we would just stand
still. Take a moment. Then turn around and walk quietly
in opposite directions.
One last question: How would you describe the relationship
you have been building (while never meeting) during the
past year?
I would describe our relationship as one of disorientation
rather than anything linear, and in that, a tremendous
amount of closeness has developed. As I wander in my steps,
an imagination of you is by my side. With you, I come closer
to sensing the multiplicity of time/events. These conditions
create an experimental context to train trust, care, and
solidarity; a way of being-with and working together that
exceeds boundaries of space and time and quantifiable
measurements. Proximity and distance are playfully
entangled, without seeking to close the gap between us.

Our research group consisted of Ilana Reynolds (US/GER)
and Sabrina Huth (GER), as well as John Taylor (NL) and
Nicolas Hubert (FR), who supported the research process.
3 Dutch curator, writer, and researcher Christel Vesters
explores the potential of wandering as an alternative way
of knowing and being in the world. According to Vesters,
“Wanderlust refers to a curiosity-driven mindset, the longing
to discover uncharted terrain without a settled plan or fixed
objective. Guided by chance, the figure of the Wanderer
embraces whatever they come across. It is in this sense that
art and literature both adopted the figure of the Wanderer as
the personification of the romantic, free spirited, the unbound
vagabond. However, there is a dark and dystopian side to the
figure of the Wanderer as well—the Wanderer who is not only
geographically lost but also mentally disoriented; lost in their
own mind, their own way of thinking, their own logic.” See
“Unfinished Systems of Non-Knowledge, PART 2: On
Wandering,” accessed July 2018, www.unfinished-systems-
of-nonknowledge.org/part2/part2.
4 Andrew Murphie, ed., The Go-To How-To Book of Anarchiving
(Montreal: Senselab, 2016), http://senselab.ca/wp2/wp-content/
uploads/2016/12/Go-To-How-To-Book-of-Anarchiving-
Portrait-Digital-Distribution.pdf.
5 Amanda Bell, “Absence/Presence,” accessed May 29, 2019,
https://lucian.uchicago.edu/blogs/mediatheory/keywords/
absence-presence/.
6 Since 2005, the artist-run Foundation Jetty (stichting la Jetée)
has been running an exhibition window in the de Pijp neigh-
borhood of Amsterdam. It is located at the corner of Ferdinand
Bolstraat, not far from the crossing with the Ceintuurbaan.
The public for this window includes passing shoppers, children,
tourists, and art lovers. The window is a platform for artists to
create an installation specifically for this location. The narrow
insular space in relationship to the street is a new starting
point for each exhibition. 7 Bell, “Absence/Presence.”

Margit
I’m interested in talking specifically about how images
form and have been informed by your dance life, and also
how the particular ways of relating to image through your
experience of Skinner Releasing and then later through
the practice of Amerta Movement have affected your
relationship with your moving body.
Sally
So I guess the first thing that stands out was I started with
Skinner Releasing, and about the same time I was doing a
lot of butoh (with Joan Laage), and they somehow overlap.
At that time, the experience with my moving body had
very much a sense of disappearing.
In order to blend or merge with an image introduced
from outside myself, I needed to slowly release tension,
and then to “disappear” in order to “become” the image.
More recently, I’ve realized through the Amerta practice
that I can merge with an image without disappearing.
I have a very specific memory while doing the Ongoing
Skinner Releasing Training, after working with Prapto in
Java, where I could sense both my body and an image at
the same time, which was new for me. Amerta changed my
relationship to my moving body as well as how I receive
the image.
The other thing is: Where is the image coming from?
In Skinner Releasing, the image comes through the poetry
of the language. In butoh, images come through different
sensorial experiences and can be nonverbal—looking at a
picture in a book, entering a nature environment, smelling
a flower.
Prapto’s work has both a sense of the dream world
and the reality world—there’s a sense of more materiality
there in the image. I think this was the point when the
image started to transform into a costume for me. It was
my way of creating poetry, a kind of material poetry. So
the image, or the costume, came from the moving body
itself, as opposed to somebody’s words. It became more
nonverbal, something I can touch, something I can feel.
Images can live in the verbal realm and in the nonverbal
realm. I can disappear and the image takes over, or I
can sense the image with my body, existing in the
here and now.

Margit
Could you share your experience of that moment where
body and image came together?
Sally
I can’t remember the specific image. I don’t know if it was
ferns, I’m not sure, but the sense of it is a spirally image
through my body. At the same time, I could feel and sense,
and maybe even see, the bones, the muscles, the tissues,
the cells. They didn’t feel separate; they just felt more like
a unified meeting. It wasn’t the body trying to find the
image or the image trying to find the body; they were
just existing.
I feel it kinesthetically, or in my body, so it can end
up being a quality, but it’s still an image, and it can
transform.
Lily
In Skinner Releasing, what I experienced right away was
there was this immediacy of the kinesthetic experience of
the image. I could immediately feel it in my body. When I
was in dance school, I thought that everybody else had a
lot of fantasy. I didn’t have those kind of stories, and I was
worried about it. [laughing]
When I experienced working with anatomical imagery
(the first time was Release and Alignment Technique with
John Rolland, an ideokinetic approach), it gave me more
trust that there is a different kind of sensorial imagination
that for me is immediately in the body; not so much a story
that I’m telling with my body. So it’s more like a poetic
approach to me. There is this sense of expanding possibil-
ity through images, and this sense of poetic experience in
my body as it is, or as it may be. Which then can transform
it. This is hard to put in words and beyond what the actual
matter of it is.…
Something that came up yesterday when I was in
the studio was the imagination of an image, because I feel
there is a difference between image and the imagination.
There are overlaps, but there is a difference actually.
Sometimes the imagination of the image is so, in a way,
beyond the body that I can feel the limitations of my body,
my physical body, moving. And sometimes, like yesterday,
I didn’t feel those limitations even though I was aware
of them in the space. That my arms, like the fingertips,
are in a certain place in the space as I move, yet with my
imagination, they might be much farther out there. I love
it when I don’t feel the limitation of my physical abilities.
[laughing] And I feel also that practicing, for example,
Skinner Releasing helps me to be more able to expand my
physical abilities.

There is a spaciousness and an expanding. Layers,
also. And then there is also the immediacy of listening.
Like, what is the image? There is this stillness involved.
Or silence perhaps. In the chapter that I submitted for the
book about Skinner Releasing Technique, I write about
listening and poetry. “Listen” and “silent” have the
same letters.
I like what you said, Sally, about how in Skinner
Releasing, poetic language is the source of the image. I am
in love with the use of poetry in SRT. I keep using the word
“immediacy” with what I feel; maybe that’s why these
images work so well for me.
I realize I don’t think of Amerta in image, with image,
in relation to image. It’s not a first connection I make.
Margit
What would you call it instead, Lily?
Lily
The first thing that comes up is making connections. Or
finding the connections that are already there and experi-
encing them. And what do these connections mean in my
dancing life, body, being? People, nature, tree. Sculpture.
Me. Sun. Rest of the world. [laughing] But then it could
also be a connection between an image that I have of
myself or an image I have of the world. In that sense,
“image” is there.
Julie
An early experience in the Skinner Releasing world, it
could have been yesterday: dancing with an image, there
was poetic image and there is also touch from another
person, which is also a form of image—landing, and
taking you, and the body…
But now I’m feeling that the experience is actually
of novelty—like a feeling of surprise. There’s a thing that

Sally: Integrating SRT and Amerta, I have begun
to tap a multifaceted dance between body and
image. Body and image can appear/disappear;
breathing between material/immaterial land-
scapes, hovering between verbal/nonverbal
realms, embodying and evoking sensation/
imagination, received and activated through
movement/stillness. The location of images
shapes the moving body’s experience—whether
arising inside, outside, or in between body and
image. Somatic Costumes are a bridge; when
worn, a costume is experienced as inside the
body through touch and outside the body through
external form. Costume offers poetic materiality.
Lastly, an image may be static or moving—alive.
Image is always “in-forming” if it’s alive. It never
completes the process of “forming” itself.

Julie: I hold the question of what fresh images arise while sitting in open atten-
tion to where-I-sit. In this, the technique of Skinner meets the river of Amerta,
the genius of places speaking. A quality of seeing, wherein what is caught in the
point of sight is received as itself doing the speaking. The mobile, angled bones
of pelvis, shoulder, [index] finger, that reference self and world. Fluted points
made by Gayogohono people, present and original inhabitants of this land. A
specific image seems to live a long life within before taking form in the mouth.

comes to mind that playing is what gives us the ability to
respond to surprise, so we end up surprised by something
that is open, that is opening—something from outside
of what we anticipate or remember in our experience. I
do think about image and the play of image as being this
unique and momentary confluence of implicit conscious
memory and explicit memory, as the micro-fibers of mem-
ory momentarily come together and blossom inside myself
or another. Kinesthetic experiences or life experiences,
that each time it’s new. I think this kind of image is very
personal, and something about that action of the image
in the dancer, in myself, is one of experiencing wholeness.
That experience of my body as whole. And then also, at
times, this thing occurs, which I connect with Skinner
Releasing but is not unique to it, that is the interplay of
self and context. The dissolution of distinction may be one
area I get more of in Amerta. And I suspect that’s because
so much is there—being (moving) in nature, in human
culture—that the immediacy of wind or of a dialogue
with another has more than the tactile, which can also be
the possibility of understanding…across distinctions or
differences.
My sense of how image is working in Amerta feels
very much about the sensations of the place, the questions
of the place, where we are.
The way I understand “space” as an image in SRT
is that it connects with bodily roots of knowing and
possibility. I feel like the image of space is like an anchor
that actually helps bridge back to something that the
body knows.
Sally
There was something, when you were talking about
“space,” Julie, that I really relate to in connection with


Skinner Releasing. And then when I think about “image”
with Amerta practice, I feel it’s much more about the
“place.” With Skinner Releasing, I’m feeling an image and
seeing it in my body as I’m moving. There is this clear
poetic language given to me that I’m experiencing, and it’s
like I’m arriving in the space; my body feels the language
somehow.
And then I have this memory of being on Prapto’s
land in Mojosongo. I remember moving, and all of a sud-
den it felt like my body was reappearing. I could sense my
bones, and then all of a sudden my muscles, and then I
could sense my breath kind of circulating in a completely
different yet concrete way. Just moving in that place, the
image appeared through the visceral and kinesthetic.
“Image” isn’t the first word I associate with Prapto’s
work, unless he does something very simple connected
to the body: “feel your feet coming from the earth.” Then
it’s more connected to my sense of the way I experience
image work and Skinner Releasing. Instead, I experience
Prapto’s languaging and practices more like symbols. I’m
given symbols: oval, circle, square. [laughing] They can be
images, but they have all these layers of meaning that are
related to place, culture, and an idea of the world. It affects
my body through a different process.
Lily
Julie, you said the word “opening,” and it’s actually one
of the main words that I usually connect to what I exper-
ience in using imagery and with Skinner Releasing.
Opening, and opening into opening, this is how I’ve been
developing my own imagery. And that has to do with
“expanding.” And I think there is something interesting;
now that I have been practicing this approach for so long
and it’s in my daily practice, I’m connecting more to ana-
tomical information. I’m more excited when I read some
things about BMC [Body-Mind Centering] or craniosacral
practice. I can tune into my own body more easily than
before. It took me another process first to be able to make
some kind of sense of it—that this is a natural fact…
but, just to use words. I had to enter and tune in from
another angle.
48 CONTACT QUARTERLY
WINTER/SPRING 2020
Margit
My experience of how I relate to embodiment has to do
with qualities, texture, form, color, flow, and weight. These
things are experiential, sensorial, or energetic. I’ve had
experience through BMC, with what Bonnie Bainbridge
Cohen calls “somatization,” where you see a picture of the
anatomic process, then you move with it, and it becomes
understood through somatic integration. When you’re
practicing SRT, what actually is it that’s being developed?
How does the image develop? Is it material? Is it a quality
for movement?
Lily
I used the word “connections” with Amerta, but I also feel
that a lot in Skinner Releasing—this connection between
my physical dancing body and what’s beyond that, both
inside and outside, and integrating; feeling the oneness
of that.
Margit
How is that arising?
Lily
Perhaps one way is through the practice of integrating
the inner awareness of an image and your relation to the
outside so that both happen at the same time. So that
these boundaries become thinner, or they may disappear.
One area where I feel they are disappearing more is with
what is called “a totality image”—where you merge with
the image. So then there is this sense of oneness as well as
differentiation and refinement within.
Margit
I think about how Prapto talks about sensory motor, not
just sensory. Is kinesthetic experience bodily? What is
the relationship between an image and something having
form? How does an image get formed? From where does
that form arise? There’s a process of turning into some-
thing and coming into its clarity. Becoming formulated.
And an image is just maybe the initiatory process from
which that forming takes place.

Lily: Pak Prapto speaks about “being perceived” while we dance.
Indonesia helps with this. There is willingness to see me. I feel easily
perceived. By the land, the green, by sea, the people who live there,
by sky, path, ancestors, by tree and its long life, its intrinsic wisdom,
by shells who washed ashore and resettled. By what is beyond all that.
I am not alone. And through this I feel this is not about me. It never
is. While simultaneously, by feeling perceived, I feel included. Being
perceived expands any image of the dance. Even if there is no image.

Julie
When I think about my urge to make a dance, my idiosyn-
cratic way that I want to make a dance is very often from
some kind of image. The guidance often shows up from
the specific image, and that is the placeholder of all the
multiplicity of directions that I could go. It can just unfold,
elaborate, and guide, to keep things from becoming just
limitless; so it forms. So I get to find something out, and in
Amerta work it seems to be “OK, but what are you going to
do? What is your application?” In Releasing, I technically
learn how to unfold, go inside of something; instead of
being on the outside, I can go in. And then I can inhabit
this space, and this was the transition for me in Releasing—
the question was, “What is in the space?” And that seemed
to be the propulsion from working with somebody else’s
images into beginning to recognize the presence of other
images and what the quality of the image was so that it
could be mined, or explored, or sat inside of. That feels
like something that is a process of creation.
STREAMS
Margit
How is image developing through your own work? Where
is the meaning for you now, and how is it filtered through
these influences?
Sally
Developing the Somatic Costume work has been one of
my key practices in developing my relationship to image:
How can I guide myself/others between facts/fictions,
the reality/dream world and the material/immaterial?
Images became more material. For example, the Furry
Heart Protector costume came from the poetry of nature
and my moving body. When moving with stones on the
beach I began putting stones on my body. Sensing the
weight, the texture, the quality of the stones, I realized I
needed something to protect my heart. I started making
a costume by taping stones on the front and the back of
my heart. In that process, I thought, “Ah, OK, I understand


when Prapto said ‘Sally, please don’t just sense the front
of the heart; sense also the back of the heart and the place
in between.’” With stones now on my body, I could experi-
ence what he was saying. The image was touching me.
Lily
For me it is in my daily practice, in my training. I literally
start my day with going into an image in my body, and
through that, the images develop; so it’s not necessarily
the image from Skinner Releasing, but it comes from there
because it is what I’ve been practicing for so long. So the
images are developing continuously through my daily
practice. I also taught workshops where I used images
that I developed further, from the practice and my teach-
ing. This is something I do to be in tune with my body and
with the world, with the reality of the imagination: the
experience of expansion. Working with stillness has been
deepened by my practice of SRT, particularly some images
that I was very moved by in the beginning. Now, in my
work, I am working more radically with stillness. So it’s
directly influencing my work.
Julie
I feel pretty far from Skinner Releasing, but if I can sort of
credit what I feel, the tone of being in the world of image
and movement, or image and action, connects with that
sort of power to draw from multiple sources at once. My
immediate response right now is personal; I’m writing,
doing photography, mapping, and working with fabric.
In my weekly practice of going outside and dancing
continuously for one hour, the encounter is more with
all of that memory but also the immediacy of ice, snow,
wind, perfume, moments of performativity.
u
ENDNOTE
1 “The SRT images at the basic level fall into two categories:
specific and totality imagery. An example of a specific is the
image of marionette strings at the knees…designed to allow
greater freedom in the hip socket. An example of a totality is
the image of floating in a pool. Then the whole self merges with
the pool—the outer edges of the self becoming the outer edges
of the pool. At times the specific string image is integrated
within the pool totality.… In a way, the imagination can be said
to be actively improvising on the images that are given, making
them relevant to the needs of the student’s process at any given
moment.” Joan Skinner, Bridget Davis, Robert Davidson, Kris
Wheeler, and Sally Metcalf, “Skinner Releasing Technique:
Imagery and Its Application to Movement Training,”
Contact Quarterly Vol. 5 no. 1 (Fall 1979).

Bonnie, at home in northern California; Nancy, at home
in western Massachusetts.
Nancy: Self and Other, or SelfOther, is a concept that
you’ve been exploring in your recent workshops. Are
they different concepts or the same?
Bonnie: I think they’re both important; it’s not one or the
other. I’ve been interested in community forever—SBMC
[The School for Body-Mind Centering] was a vehicle for
establishing community. How does that happen? Self and
Other is one way of looking at it. As individuals, we’re not
a single entity. We’re multifaceted.… And as a community
we’re an entity, but within that, we’re multifaceted.
We start with an egg and a sperm, that’s already two
very different consciousnesses. And then at one point we’re
eight cells—we could become eight individuals; that’s
when they do in vitro fertilization—so we have within
us the possibility of eight distinct people! And we are
different personalities in different situations. Not like a
split personality, where people lose the unity and get lost
in the multiplicity. But in different times of our lives or in
different moments of the day, different personalities come
forth, either to bug us [laughing] and cause distress or to
balance out the others. Instead of seeing this as a problem,
we can see this as calling forth another aspect of Self.
NSS: The diversity within the Self?
BBC: Yeah. So it could be a relationship issue or a work
issue or illness or whatever brings out different aspects
of our Self. These different aspects of Self exist and are
available, and some will be more dominant, some more
hidden. How do we balance the matrix of our Self? How
do we integrate all the aspects of possibility? There’s a
tendency for stronger elements to be more active. And
then something happens and we have to call forth more
of the hidden. I’m really—internally and also externally—
playing with that.
When we’re in the womb, our birth mother is the
environment, and at the same time our egg was in our
mother when she was in her mother. So our grandmother
was the vehicle. She was the one who was our first contact
with the outer world, with whatever culture that was, or
situation—emotional, physical, spiritual.
I was reading something interesting, Nancy, that
the body of the person comes mainly from the egg. But
the catalyst, the movement, comes from the sperm. I’ve
dialogued with western science, biology, physiology, and

Maybe when we are simply present in the moment, there is no
separation between listening and expression.

neurology since I was 16 years old. From them I’ve learned
about form and function. Within that context, I’m always
looking at process within the form, so I’ve found other
things. This process reveals itself through the presence
and movement of consciousness through the body. In a
way, that’s the sperm-ness moving through the egg-ness.
The egg is creating form, but it can’t create form
without the motion. Some of us tend to be more motionable,
and some of us tend to be more in stillness. That stability
of form and the mobility of transforming our form vary
among each of us and change within us continually. It’s
that dialogue and interplay between us and within us
that creates SelfOther and Self and Other.
Nancy: Do you feel there needs to be a distinction (in
BMC practice and/or language around that practice)
between science’s largely objective lens and a more
subjective way of working that acknowledges outcomes
that are grounded in personal experience? Is there a gap
here to be bridged?
Bonnie: Communication occurs in multiple ways.
There is the objective approach of observation of others
via vision and hearing that Western science has primarily
limited itself to. The modern scientific method is often
only viewed this way.
Then there is the transmission of knowledge through
personal experience, in which we can utilize all of our
senses and cellular processes.
For example, the ocean can be studied through
descriptive words, paintings, audio recordings, and videos.
Yet until you have personally experienced the ocean, your
understanding of it remains only conceptual and/or
metaphorical. It lacks depth of knowing.
For me, fully actualized science has the depth of percep-
tion based on both the observable and the experienced.
The basic question is, can it be transmitted to others, and
can the patterns that emerge be deeply studied and shared
as collective research? Personal experience, foundational
for astute observation, provides a reality that objective
information alone can only allude to.
Cell to Brain, Brain to Cell
NSS: How are you working in your Self and Other
workshops to embody the ideas that you’re talking
about? I know that the basis of your work is not just
talking philosophy but embodying things!
BBC: First I want to say something about the phenomenon
of “cell to brain on the same side, and brain to cell on the
opposite side.”
For example, if somebody has a stroke on the right
side of the brain, we know that the left side of the body
is paralyzed. If they have a stroke on the left side of the
brain, the right side of the body is paralyzed. That is just
known. When the brain is injured, it can no longer process
information coming in from or going out to the related
cells on the opposite side of the body.
But what I’ve discovered over the last 10 years has been
that when the weight of your consciousness, or awareness,
is in the cellular experience—for which you have to pause
and wait to perceive a response—the information travels
first to the same side of the brain that the cells are on.
This traveling along the same side of the body is probably
vascular and fascial rather than neurological. The blood
vessels do not cross the midline in the same way that the
nerves do. And the vascular system is an older system. The
heartbeat, as an example, begins at three weeks embryolog-
ically; the brainwaves begin in the fetus at about six
months. The circulatory system is an older one than
the nerves, and the nerves rest on the foundation of
the vascular pathways.
NSS: Is the cellular level a slower process?
BBC: It is slower in that the cells are reorganizing. By
pausing and holding the space for the cells to absorb their
current state, they begin to recognize their present inter-
relationships and begin to return to the primal relationships
developed in the embryo that created our original form,
before other patterns set in. The cells are then released
from the “outer,” more static or fixed control of the brain.

An example: If someone has an injury on the right
side of the brain and has paralysis in the left leg and arm,
it’s effective to start working cellularly with the right leg,
which is, quote, okay. This allows the cellular information
on the right side of the body to travel to the right side of
the brain, which is injured. Then work cellularly with the
left leg, which is affected, to send information to the left
side of the brain, which is okay. We then repeat the same
process with the arms. The results can be extraordinary.
The brain cells are nourished by reexperiencing the primal
foundation, established in the embryo, of communication
between cells on the same side of the body.
When we say “focus on this subject,” we’re engaging
the pathway from the brain to the cells. Then we have to
pause in order for the cells to communicate more informa-
tion back to the brain. So what I found with this “cell to
brain on the same side” is that by working cellularly on the
same side of the body as the brain injury, more information
comes into the injured side of the brain. Therefore, it has
more information from which to then control the opposite,
or affected, side of the body. I’m giving the example of a
stroke because that’s the most common and clearest to
understand, but it would be true for anything. If you work
with the right leg cellularly, it will go to the right side of
the brain; if you work with the left leg cellularly, it will go
to the left side of the brain. Then as the brain has more
information, it automatically utilizes that information in
controlling the opposite side of the body.
It’s very interesting because it actually works. Not with
every person, because not everything works for every person.
Both of these things are happening all the time—
cell to brain, brain to cell, cell to brain.… We need both
connections.
What I will often say is, “Open the back of your brain.”
The information comes in through the back of the central
nervous system—the back of the spinal cord and brain—
and the motor pathways come out through the front. We
are just built that way.
Bonnie and Dodge exploring the separateness of Self and
Other and the unity of SelfOther.
Deep Listening and Expression
BBC: How this might relate to Self and Other… You and
I are sharing now, right? We’re talking, and I can say,
“Well, Nancy, what do you think about this?” But if I keep
thinking “Nancy, what do you think about this?” I’m not
going to really take in what you’re saying. But if I open the
back of me and just be receptive, in deep listening, then
there’s a pause, and then from that deep listening I come
forward with my expression and understanding, and you
go into the back of your body (spinal cord and brain) into
deep listening.
NSS: What do you think about the alternation of those? I
feel like in dancing and improvising and Contact Improvi-
sation—and I would think also in bodywork—it’s always a
combination. You’re listening, you feel a signal of where to
move or what to say or do, and then you do it, and then you
pause again. Right? Would you say they alternate, or are
they always happening at the same time?
BBC: I think it’s probably alternating, slowly or at great
speed. And sometimes you jump circuit. I could say we
interrupt the cycle. For some people it’s an interruption,
and for some other people it’s just a faster connection. In
some cultures, you’re on top of each other in a very fast
rhythm, and in others, there’s a lot of lonnnng phrasing
and in others, short phrasing—the difficulty happens
when one is a short phraser and the other’s a long phraser,
or one is slow and the other is quick. Maybe when we

are simply present in the moment, there is no separation
between listening and expression.
For example, in Contact Improvisation, if you are
not receiving information cellularly into the back of your
spinal cord and brain and are instead trying to figure out
how to respond to a situation from the front of your brain,
you can get hurt, because you’re inhibiting the reflexive
knowing from the present cellular experience. Incoming
information comes in through the back, outgoing motor
responses go out through the front. In any current situa-
tion, to the degree that we are not open to the incoming
information and are responding only through the front
of our brain, we are engaged in habitual behavior, which
resides in the front. Reflexive motor response is based on
your cellular knowing in the present moment rather than
on preconceived ideas, principles, and habits of experience
that are now stored in the front of your brain.
NSS: What I’ve enjoyed over the years about Contact
Improvisation is that it’s a kind of conversation where
you’re able to talk and listen at the same time—or very
rapidly alternating—and the rhythms created by the
varying lengths of either one of those, in terms of priorities,
vary. Obviously, if there’s a dangerous moment, the action
might take quick priority; or conversely, in an open
moment, where you don’t have a strong impulse to DO
anything, there might be more listening. I love the idea
of being in that pause, that open moment, together.

Differentiating Self and Other
BBC: With SelfOther, we need to also differentiate Self and
Other. The distinction between the two is very important.
There’s a cycling within and between us that’s becoming
one. Thoughts, feelings, whatever is moving between us—
we are becoming a unit of SelfOther. At the same time,
you are Other to me and I am Other to you. I’m not Nancy,
and you’re not Bonnie. For instance, you mentioned earlier
that years ago when you were in a workshop with me on
Transitional Fluid, I had said something that was mean-
ingful to you, but it was your experience that you shared,
not mine.
NSS: Yeah, it’s wonderful that you always point that out,
because it’s very common for people to say, “You said this
and I learned that from you.” But you are provoking my
learning for myself.
BBC: Exactly. Or people will say “your work.” I would say it
becomes “our work.”
NSS: Well, it does ultimately. But this pointing to experience,
this kind of provocation that you’re creating, is the environ-
ment, the condition, in which I have my experience. Creating
that condition is an essential and important factor in the
evolution of our consciousness. People in your workshops
aren’t just wandering around the room without any direc-
tion. I mean, your presence gives a lot of direction, but that’s
not always quite enough. You give more orientation than
that. I feel like the condition that you set up—and that we
all set up in our teaching and structuring of improvisations
and our relationship to our communities—is very
influential and crucial in what happens among people.

I want to honor the function of creating conditions
for experience. This creating of conditions in which people
can learn and discover on their own, within a community
with a positive, accepting, benevolent intention, is a very
special and hard-to-describe art form…or skill. It’s hard
to pin it down, but you can feel it when it’s there.
BBC: I think we’re planting seeds and blowing them into
the wind. But you can’t grow the seed—the seed has to
grow itself. And then you end up with a forest. You may
have started with one tree giving seeds and then those
seeds grow trees that grow seeds. And the tree that is
setting these seeds received a seed from others. The Self
and the Other each is an entity and together becomes
SelfOther. Yet within SelfOther, there’s a Self and an Other.
Unless you’ve had a practice of some kind that allows Self
and Other to become SelfOther, it separates more and
more into Self and Other.
One of the things I’ve done quite a bit over the last
years in workshops is that I’ll ask people to stand one by
one and say their name. As an example, I’ll say “Bonnie”
and sit down. To stand, to speak your name, and to hear
your name before you sit down. So you really establish
your space in the room, and everyone really establishes
their space in the room before we do anything together.
Many people hate that. Because to stand out, to really
claim your space, is often difficult. A lot of people maybe
come late because they don’t want to do it—as a first thing,
before people know each other. We’re standing in front of
strangers. But by the end, there’s a way that the space, the
mind of the room, has formed a community. It’s the clarity
of “I’m here.” Each one: I’m here and I recognize that you
are here and that we are all here together.
NSS: I’m wondering if you give time in your workshops for
an open space with little instruction, an open nonverbal
moment for moving or being still, to just process the day’s
information and experience, integrating the Self and the
Other within the day’s work.
BBC: In my classes, there are no two people who do the
same thing. There are times when I’ll just say, OK, this is
your playground; whatever you want to do. Especially now
when I’m having such large workshops, I might have two
or three rooms where people can choose a different space.
The spaces have their own feeling, their own quality. Some
people will be dancing; some just lying down; some doing
hands-on, giving and receiving individual attention; some
talking, looking at anatomical models, handouts.
In the beginning, there’s a very strong form, but through
most of the rest, there’s very little form. The theme might
be comparing and exploring the pubic disc versus the
sacrum as the keystone of the arch between the two legs
and noticing how the sacrum, as the keystone, locks the
spine, and the pubic disc frees the spine. Do it and see
how you feel.
NSS: What’s interesting to me is that in your work and in
the work you have generated with others, there is a range
from very specific anatomical instruction, like what you
just described, to a very wide open place of exploration.
Or vice versa. I think that’s remarkable and wonderful.
BBC: In discussions after an exploration, people will say,
“I don’t know what to say”—because it’s preverbal. That’s
one of our challenges in the field of somatics—how do we
create verbal and written language. You and Lisa, through
CQ, have been at the forefront of that. How does experience
come back to words? How do we create a vocabulary of
preverbal experience that then goes back to the experience?
So that the verbal isn’t what is being transmitted but rather
transmits back to original experience. It’s another seed.

BBC: OK. I mentioned earlier the egg and the sperm, the
embryology, and I’d like to add something. In the womb,
the baby and the mother are one—SelfOther. And then
gradually we become separate from the mother, but we’re
still identified within the family, within the culture, within
the era or country. We may or may not be comfortable
with any of these, but we’re inescapably influenced by
them. This is our original field in which we experience
and develop our early sense of Self, Other, SelfOther, and
Self and Other. How do I experience and perceive my Self,
your Self, ourSelf? How can we gradually grow the accep-
tance, discernment, and trust to become comfortable,
joyful, and grateful for the multiplicity and diversity of
the expanding unit?
painting by Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen
Animals also experience the separateness and the unity of
Self and Other.

Illuminate Theater members Taiwo Ojodun [far background] (Lagos,
Nigeria), Olowu Busayo (Lagos), and Jakob Maché (W. Europe) in their
performance, Olugba (“Pure Water”), in the Market Square in Bariga,
Lagos, Nigeria. The pile of plastic sachets are the common source
of drinking water for the majority of Lagosians—bottled water is too
expensive and water from the rivers too polluted. Read Jakob and
Busayo’s article in the 45.1 CQ CI Newsletter online on CQ’s website
(public access). Photo © Illuminate Theatre Productions
Today we’re facing this challenge. It’s happened at
other times in history, but with the Internet we have the
possibility of a unity even if we don’t want it. How do we not
lose our independent sense of Self, and how do we embrace
now the SelfOther with the world itself—including nature
and the environment?
We’re being challenged today at such an enormous
scale. There are those who are intensifying the Self AND
Other, and there are those who are advocating for more
SelfOther. And it depends on each of us. How do we help
to build, within a dance, a movement class, or what we’re
doing, the recognition of SelfOther within the context of
Self and Other—the possibility of it through the experience
of it. To point to it isn’t enough. There has to be the space,
the space for the experience. And then to bring it back into
words so we can think about it, discuss it, and share it, and
then go BACK into the experience. Not to lose our Self and
the recognition of other Selves but to embrace both fully.
After we turned the recording off, Bonnie said, “Let’s breathe
in and out together.” And I said, “Can we do it now before we
hang up?” And she said, “I would love to.” And we did.

INTRODUCTION
It is midnight when Dulce, Marcela, and I are heading
toward the Mexico City south station to take a bus to
Ayotzinapa, Mexico. We meet in the station with a group
of Mexican artists, social workers, psychologists, priests,
and social activists who have been offering art, social,
and psychological services to people who have suffered
trauma due to wars, displacement, and political persecu-
tion. I don’t know most of these people, but instantly I feel
supported by them. We are part of this, and we are in this
together. That sounds cliché, but the experience is palpable.
When the bus passed by Iguala, a town near Ayotzin-
apa, I inevitably felt discomfort and fear. In this town, the
43 students from the rural teacher-training college Raúl
Isidro Burgos were disappeared on September 26, 2014.
The reason we came here is to attend the Interna-
tional Tribunal of Conscience of Peoples in Movement
(ITCPM) in response to an invitation from the National
Lawyers Guild’s Task Force on the Americas and the
Mexican People’s Lawyers Society (Asociación Mexicana
de Abogados del Pueblo). The ITCPM was created to
provide an opportunity for relatives and victims of
political violence, disappearance, and land displacement
in Guerrero, Puebla, and Mexico City to present their
cases in tribunal hearings and seek potential legal support
and follow-up from a group of Mexican and international
judges. Dulce, Marcela, and I are somatic practitioners
and are joined by three psychologists in order to provide
emotional support to the participants of the tribunal
hearings in Guerrero from August 12 to August 15, 2018.
OUR SOMATIC BACKGROUND
Dulce, Marcela, and I have similar backgrounds. We
are Mexican contemporary/modern dancers who became
interested in somatic approaches to movement, which
led us to obtain training and certifications in Body-Mind
Centering® (Dulce and Diana) and Feldenkrais (Marcela).
The three of us have lived outside Mexico and have gained
further knowledge, professional credentials, and experience
in somatic practices, dance, and choreography while living
away. Nevertheless, the three of us have regular somatic
practices in Mexico.

THE SOMATIC COMPONENT OF THE WORKSHOPS
The goal of our presence in the ITCPM was to provide
a safe and healing container to help all participants (victims,
judges, and staff support) recover from the exhausting
experience of sharing and listening to traumatic events
during the hearings. To accomplish that, Dulce and I
designed the curriculum for the workshops. The objectives
were as follows:
a) To introduce the elements of stillness/action,
relaxation/tension, and exertion/recuperation using
a somatic approach, mainly based on Body-Mind
Centering® (BMC) fundamentals of developmental
movement proposed by Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen
b) To create a positive and playful environment that
supports participants’ relationships, trust, and
resilience
In addition to BMC elements, Marcela introduced
Feldenkrais principles. We also used elements of trauma
and resilience from the Strozzi Institute and Somatic
Experiencing® from Peter Levine.
Some of the scores/exercises proposed were awareness
of the front and back body and three dimensions of the
body (length, width, and depth); awareness of the body’s
supports and yielding into the earth; walking awareness
and relation with the space; and transition between stillness
and action supported by prevertebrate developmental
patterns. We worked with cellular breathing, “sponging,”
and “pulsating,” which are basic neurocellular patterns
of BMC. We emphasized how cellular breathing supports
stillness with presence, and sponging and pulsating
support action with awareness of our boundaries and
resilience, which prepare us to establish contact with
the space and others.
In addition, we were very interested in proposing
group movement scores that would foster connections
between participants. We found it useful to first use
elastic bands as individuals explored the strength and
resilience from the extracellular fluid, as well as the
regulation of tone, tension, and relaxation. Gradually, we
proposed scores with elastic bands and balls in duets and
groups, which created mutual connections, trust, and
interdependency. It was very useful to use the bands as a
metaphor for individual and collective resilience and the
power of the collective to address trauma.
Marcela, who joined the team close to the convening
of the hearings, introduced elements of the Feldenkrais
method. She offered a lesson about torsions, exploring
turning right and left in space while differentiating the
parts of the body that can initiate this movement (head,
chest, eyes). This lesson fostered coordination as a prepa-
ration for the rest of the session. She also conducted a
short lesson on external breathing, which complemented
the BMC experiences of cellular breathing. Each session
finished with a playful group exercise, and participants
were invited to share their experiences during the session.
THE EXPERIENCE IN THE WORKSHOPS
The first workshop took place in the rural teacher-
training college Raúl Isidro Burgos in Ayotzinapa, before
the first tribunal hearing in Guerrero. The other three
workshops took place in Chilpancingo, where the rest
of the tribunal hearings were being held.
One of the main learning experiences for us was to
be flexible to change and adapt the curriculum of the
workshops to the modifications in the agenda of the
tribunals, the number of people available to participate,

the time limitations, and the conditions of the spaces
where the sessions were taking place. After each class,
the somatic team met to evaluate the session and plan
the necessary modifications in the curriculum for the
next day.
The first session in Ayotzinapa was shorter than the
rest of the sessions, lasting 30 minutes. It was repeated two
times with different participants, who arrived at various
times. The goal was to create a sense of arrival and connec-
tion between the participants who had traveled for many
hours. We guided playful and collaborative dynamics, such
as simple breathing and movement patterns repeated in
unison by the groups, as well as an activity of passing a hula
hoop, which involved collaboration between participants.
The sessions in Chilpancingo took place in the after-
noon after the tribunal hearings. We offered one and a half
hour sessions, adjusting the time as needed in response to
delays and changes in the agenda. We had between 7 and
11 participants in each session. Some of them participated
in all three sessions in Chilpancingo, while others attended
only one. Therefore, we created independent sessions that
followed almost the same curriculum but with small varia-
tions in each. A few participants had already been exposed
to corporeal practices, which was very helpful for the
participants with less experience, and to us as facilitators.
All the participants were adults and included a mix
of genders. Most of them presented their cases to the tribu-
nal audiences in the morning. They or their relatives were
victims of human rights violations, and some of them
were afraid for their family and their own lives. Other
participants were ITCPM staff members, who oversaw the
logistical aspects of the audiences, or artists, community
activists, lawyers, and national and international judges.
Generating a connection at the body level helped to
decrease the attention given to differences in education,
profession, gender, and the roles that people played at the
ITCPM. One female judge at the end of a session said:
I have been sharing space with you during the
last days, but after this session I have a different
consciousness about you, and I feel that we have
established a connection without words.
For other participants, especially those who shared
their cases in the hearings, the sessions worked as a space
for a partial recovery and a playful experience. One female
participant said, “I feel calmer now, and I have not laughed
in a long time.” Another male participant who gave testi-
mony in the hearings said, “This was a good space, but at
the same time weird.…We made collective actions, and at
the same time we dedicated time to each of us.”
For other participants, the session was a space that
opened body awareness, body-mind connections, and
creativity. A male ITCPM support staff member said:
I had the idea that to rest is to stop something, to
sleep, or turn off the body, and through this exper-
ience, I felt my body in a different way. When I
dance or move, I realize that coming back to the
container of my body produces a change…such as
having the possibility to see a problem with a
different perspective.

Three months before the ITCPM, we met with the
psychologists in person and by phone to share the goals
and content of each of our sessions and to find ways to collab-
orate and support each other. As somatic practitioners, we
felt supported by the presence of three psychologists, who
provided one-on-one counseling to those participants in
the hearings who desired it. Participants could choose to
participate in the somatic group workshops or to receive
individual psychological support. Some of the participants
in the somatic sessions decided to attend individual coun-
seling the next day, and vice versa. The experience was
positive and enriched participants’ options to feel
emotionally supported during the ITCPM.
WHAT WE LEARNED
For us, the experience was tremendously profound
in terms of what “somatic accompaniment” means, how
to guide it, and participants’ responses to it. We were
heartened by the positive reaction of the participants to
the workshops. They were very open to follow our proposal/
scores, even when many had not been exposed to these
types of movement approaches. We were careful to express
at the beginning that they could choose to stop their parti-
cipation in the session at any time if they felt uncomfortable
with it. However, nobody decided to leave. In addition, we
realized that touch was something that participants were
comfortable with. They were comfortable holding hands,
touching the backs of other participants with their hands,
or resting back to back. We were cautious to introduce
relations and interdependency, so we started with balls
and elastic bands, and then transitioned into body-to-
body relation.
We were also very pleased to share this material
in the context of the work of human rights advocacy
organizations. In Mexico, to our knowledge, there have
not been previous instances of using somatic approaches
photo © Asociación Mexicana de Abogados del Pueblo
[Left to right] Psychologists from Grupo Cleta (Meztli, Maribel, and
Galia), Dulce, Marcela, María Elena Hernández—lawyer and coordi-
nator of Asociación Mexicana de Abogados del Pueblo—and Diana.
60 CONTACT QUARTERLY
WINTER/SPRING 2020
photo © Asociación Mexicana de Abogados del Pueblo
Diana, Dulce, and Marcela with participants of a somatic session using improvisa-
tion with bands to promote mutual connections and interdependency with musical
accompaniment. The International Tribunal of Conscience of Peoples in Movement,
Guerrero, Mexico, 2018.
in this context. We thanked both organizations (National
Lawyers Guild’s Task Force on the Americas, and Asocia-
ción Mexicana de Abogados del Pueblo) for their visionary
approach in convening a multidisciplinary team of art-
ists, psychologists, and somatic practitioners to provide
favorable conditions for participants in order to help them
recover from the strenuous work of the hearings and their
ongoing search for justice. It is worth noting that these
interventions are not a substitute for the participants’
access to justice, the repair of the damage, and restitution.
In Mexico, as in most countries, the practice of
somatic education is predominantly accessible to people
who are white mestizo, college educated, urban, and at a
medium to high socioeconomic level. Therefore, it felt very
fulfilling for us to share this somatic support with a diverse
population, including rural and indigenous participants.
Following the ITCPM, we identified the need to provide
specific workshops to relatives and victims in communi-
ties affiliated with advocacy organizations interested in
continuing the somatic accompaniment. We consider it
important to tailor our workshops with regard to when
participants were exposed to the traumatic event and how
much time has elapsed since. The Asociación Mexicana de
Abogados del Pueblo is also interested in continuing and
strengthening the relationship with the team that was
established at the ITCPM and, depending on funding,
creating similar opportunities in the near future.

Since 1990, Kitsou Dubois has
pursued the study of movement
in zero gravity with a team of dancers
and circus artists. Kitsou’s credentials,
unique in the field of choreography,
include collaborations with NASA (via
the French grant Villa Médicis hors-les-
murs) and the European Space Agency,
and a long-term relationship with the
Space Observatory of the CNES (Centre
National d’Études Spatiales in France).
In 1999, she received her doctorate in
aesthetics, sciences, and technologies
of art from the University of Paris 8,
writing her dissertation on dance in
weightless states. Her dance works
explore alternative relationships to
gravity, whether on the walls of build-
ings, in water, using aerial apparatus,
or in weightless environments. To date,
she has embarked on twenty-one para-
bolic flights and continues to create
works exploring weightlessness.
Toni Craige and Adam Dipert
are dance and life partners interested
in what humans can learn from zero
gravity environments. Adam introduced
Toni to zero gravity dance through the
book Stardance by Spider and Jeanne
Robinson, and they have been dream-
ing about it together ever since. Toni is
a dancer influenced by contact impro-
visation and Body-Mind Centering®
,
while Adam holds a PhD in physics
and is a professional circus performer.
Since 2013, Adam’s research into zero
gravity movement has led him to write
computer programs simulating the
human body in weightlessness, speak
at conferences around the world, and
participate in two zero gravity flights.
Adam teamed up with Allegra Searle-
LeBel (U.S. national coordinator for
World Space Week) to realize a shared
dream: to bring the most experienced
zero gravity dancer, Kitsou Dubois,
to the United States to deepen their
study of zero gravity movement. Kitsou
trained a group of dancers, including
Adam and Toni, in her work in zero
gravity perception during a two-day
residency hosted by the Smith College
Dance Department in Northampton,
MA. We had no idea how completely
we were about to get our minds blown.
—Toni Craige and Adam Dipert

Who are we without gravity? How do
people living in a gravitational environ-
ment train to move without gravity?
What aspects of our intelligence and
capacity can be accessed when we let
go of this primary orientation? These
questions and new ones were formed
and redefined during our residency
with Kitsou. We found it fascinating
that a training meant to prepare
people for zero gravity created such
harmony within ourselves on the
surface of the Earth. The feeling of
buoyancy, ease, and groundedness
lasted for weeks. Learning to move in
zero gravity challenges fundamental
concepts that we have about ourselves
and dissolves many habitual behaviors
developed while growing up on the
surface of a planet. Following are some
of the key concepts and approaches
Kitsou shared with us during her
residency.
Movement in and out of Gravity
In this context, “zero gravity” (also
referred to here as “zero g” or weight-
lessness) is not meant metaphorically
but literally. Zero gravity refers to the
complete absence of gravitational
directionality. Iconic images of astro-
nauts in zero gravity include those of
long hair floating freely in all direc-
tions, people velcroed to the wall to
sleep, and the use of sophisticated
technologies for simple things like
drinking water.
To get experience in zero g prior
to going into space, NASA astronauts
train on planes that travel in giant
62 CONTACT QUARTERLY
62 CONTACT QUARTERLY
WINTER/SPRING 2020
WINTER/SPRING 2020
arcs, called parabolas. The parabolas
create thirty-second-long periods
of zero gravity, alternating with
periods of increased gravity. Kitsou
received a grant in the early 1990s to
study movement at NASA’s Johnson
Space Center in Houston, Texas, and
was awarded a residency in London
for two years (1999–2000) with the
agency Arts Catalyst, during which
she made parabolic flights with the
Russian Space Research Agency at
Star City in Moscow (a cosmonaut
training center) and with the Euro-
pean Space Agency. She has since
been on twenty-one parabolic flights
with CNES and created many artistic
works based on her experiences. Her
efforts have constructed a new view
of the human body and perceptual
experience released from gravity.
The sensation of gravity acting
on our mass is one of the primary ways
that we sense movement and the
position of our joints. Kitsou empha-
sized that the initial experience in
zero gravity is of “having no body”
and “being only eyes.” According to
Kitsou, our individual lives as well
as the history of our species is a
“construction in relationship to
gravity,” and that “the experience
of flight in weightlessness is a very
paradoxical experience.… It’s not
simply flying; it’s something that
causes a complete change in your
organizational reference points.”
One way to understand the loss of
bodily awareness in zero gravity is to
consider our dependence on gravita-
tional references, such as the tension
in our muscles, to develop a sense of
where we are in space. Without this
reference, our habituated mapping
strategies become inaccessible. Of
course, this zero-gravity-induced
“anesthesia” presents a challenge to
skillful movement in zero gravity
environments. To reconnect and
orient to our environment, we must
find new strategies for creating
internal and external relationships.
On Earth, we are strongly drawn
to organize in relation to the surfaces
that we are touching (for instance,
the ground, a chair, or a friend). In
zero g, we can have brief moments
of touching and organizing around
other objects, but often we aren’t
touching any solid object. The slight-
est push off a surface has a very large
impact on the body. Dancers must
learn to push and pull precisely and
minimally to avoid chaotic, out of
control movement. Kitsou spoke
about our tendency in gravitational
environments to “spend our time
pushing to move forward…. In zero
g, you cannot do that anymore, and
that changes everything.” She empha-
sized the need to focus on support
instead of only on where we are
going: “We really have to think about
the preparation; it’s the anchoring
that we have to focus on.” We sensed
a spiritual and cultural criticism in
her analysis; we don’t know how to
be centered, forgetting our ourselves
and our support in our constant
pushing, reaching, and grasping.

Kitsou said, “On Earth, we spend
our time avoiding the act of falling.
As dancers, you’re very familiar with
this. Because you go toward the
ground, you try to do so with fluidity
and grace. Suddenly, zero g changes
everything because there is no longer
any risk of falling. It’s not about fall-
ing well but about not falling at all.”
We actually feel safest and most at
home when we are falling toward
the Earth. To not be falling is quite
disorienting. Zero gravity training
shows us how profoundly we are
shaped by our home planet and lets
us experience what it’s like to be a
free-falling being, not in the sense
that we are falling freely but in the
sense that we are, perhaps for the
first time, freed from falling.


Key Concepts and Strategies
Kitsou’s training emphasized a
quality of quiet, precise centered-
ness, with attention to the support
point of movement, using the body as
a “measurement tool,” strengthening
internal connections, and awareness
of the volume of the body and the
environment.
Quiet Centeredness
In the first exercise of the training,
Kitsou organized the space like a
traditional dance class—students
spread out, facing the teacher, with
bodies aligned to the architecture
of the room. We began by standing,
establishing our central axis and
feeling the flow or current of gravity
in which gravity pulls in a downward
direction and the earth pushes equally
in an upward direction. Tuning into
these two vertical energetic vectors,
our bodies came into alignment
and released excess effort. Next, we
added a third direction by bending
our knees in a simple plié. Instead of
focusing on the sensation of bend-
ing in the knees, ankles, and hips,
Kitsou’s verbal cuing created a sense
of extension into another spatial
dimension with a quality of precision
and a heightened experience of
distance.
In another simple and subtle
lesson, Kitsou taught a repatterning
exercise for the eyes. She instructed
us to turn our head and “view the
world from our occiput,” instead of
leading with the eyes or chin. The
results could immediately be felt in
our posture, balance, and vantage
point. She explained that when we
initiate head turning with our eyes or
chin, we tend to reach away from our
base of support and destabilize our
axis, which has amplified repercus-
sions in zero gravity. However, when
we turn from the occiput, we stay on
our axis and see the world without
leaving our support. The physical
sensation was of rooting the eyes


down to the feet through the path-
way of the optic nerve to the back
of the skull and through the brain
stem, spinal cord, and peripheral
nerves, down through the back. In
this way, we remain calm, allowing
light to bring us information about
the world. This exercise alleviates the
reach with the eyes, preparing us for
zero gravity, in which even the small-
est movements can be destabilizing.
After establishing this quietly
centered quality, Kitsou asked us to
perform simple movements of our
extremities, like lifting and lowering
the shoulders. Our tendency was to
focus on the muscular sensation in
the shoulders and to lose the sensa-
tion of the feet and the current of
gravity. Kitsou instructed us to stay
connected to our support and axis
with phrases like “keep the memory
of the foot” and “keep the flow going
foot to head, head to foot.” At first,
this emphasis on sensing gravity and
verticality felt odd in the context of a
zero gravity dance training. Later, we
came to realize that the training is
about finding something to organize
in reference to while staying internally
aware and connected.
Body as a Unit of Measurement
Kitsou noted that seeing and turning
the head from the occiput not only
keeps you centered but makes you
“aware of the space between your
body and the point you are looking
at.… It’s unconscious, but it sets the
body as a unit of measurement.” She
said, “In weightlessness, the idea
is that the body itself is the unit of
measurement of the environment
that you’re in. In other words, it’s
from your own body that you get to
understand what surrounds you.” For
instance, Kitsou asked us to create
circles with our elbows, focusing not
on the muscular sensation in the
shoulders (the “loudest” sensation on
Earth) but on the distance from the
tip of our elbows to both our axis and
our base of support (usually the feet).
This strategy of shifting attention
to measurement rather than effort
created spaciousness in the joints
and structural strength and clarity,
while offering a non-gravitational
reference for organization.
Strengthening Internal Connections
Later in the training, we began
organizing internally in reference
64 CONTACT QUARTERLY
64 CONTACT QUARTERLY
WINTER/SPRING 2020
WINTER/SPRING 2020
to forces from various directions.
The first exercise in this vein was a
variation on the spiraling rolls so
common in release technique and
contact improvisation training.
One dancer lies on their back and
reaches across their chest with an
arm. Another dancer pulls on the
arm such that the dancer on the floor
spirals onto their belly. If the muscle
tone is too flaccid or too tense, the
pulling dancer has to pull with more
force. Dancers must create the right
internal organization for the move-
ment to be easy. “There is a notion of
distance and structure” in the body,
according to Kitsou. If the tone is
just right, it takes almost no effort
to turn the body over, and the body
is almost weightless. She explains,
“I’m going to give him an intention,
but it’s not me who pulls; it’s when
I sense that he has connected his
spine that I insist a little. It’s the two
of us, and at that point, you have
almost no weight.… It’s not about
weight.” After establishing an ability
to connect our hand to our center
and move force through the body,
we began initiating more complex
movements through the arm, such
as being guided in and out of the
floor and blurring the roles of leader
and follower.
Our last session began with an
exercise on creating internal connec-
tions and a sense of volume. One
partner stood still, activating the
current of gravity. Another partner
placed a hand on the partner’s body
with the intentions of: (1) feeling
through the structure into the
ground, and (2) applying no weight
and no force. Both dancers were
to internally connect the point of
contact to the ground through their
body. Next, the active partner placed
their other hand somewhere else
on the receiver. Both partners then
made a connection between the two
points of contact and between each
point and the ground. Sending infor-
mation into structure without weight
felt like a tactile X-ray machine. It
reminded us of contact improvisation

exercises, but the weightless hand
made the connections on an ener-
getic/awareness level rather than
through force transmission.
Relationships between Volumes
In introducing her material on the
first day of the workshops, Kitsou
described a progression from focus-
ing on skeletal organization to the
awareness of volume, “because, in
zero g, we have the sensation of a
dilation, a feeling of volume, that
we have much less of on Earth.
We are a human volume inside an
environmental volume. How do we
manage to circulate the relationships
between the different volumes?”
The main theoretical informa-
tion on volume came while doing
sit-ups as she spoke about using
volume to orient the body. Orienting
to volume decreases muscular effort!
Kitsou had us focus our attention
on the relationship between our
volume and the volume of space in
front of and behind us while doing
sit-ups. “When we go to the front,
we’re going to open the space behind
us, and when we go to the back, we’ll
compress the air behind us.… Begin
with the organization of the body,
and then you move on to focus on the
space. It’s possible to find your axis
beginning with yourself, but you can
also find your axis starting with the
sensation—no, not sensation—with
the awareness of the volume around
you. It’s the volume around you that
gives the sensation of an interior,
and the volume inside that allows
the volume outside to exist; it’s really
a question of constant interaction
between these volumes. The idea
behind this is that you’re never alone,
you’re linked to the environment
you’re in.” Kitsou’s choice of “aware-
ness” rather than “sensation” here is
emblematic of many aspects of her
training. We learned to be “aware” of
things that we cannot “sense.” Is this
possible? It’s certainly paradoxical,
and we believe we experienced the
shift in awareness.
Moving Forward with Awareness
and Appreciation
Since our training with Kitsou, we
have continued our research into
dance, perception, movement, and
human possibility in zero gravity
environments through the use of
pools, aerial harnesses, dance stu-
dios, flotation chambers, parabolic
flight, and other techniques. Main-
taining the current trajectory of
space exploration, more and more
humans will be spending time in
space, which would represent a
major transition for our species
as a whole. The space industry is
dominated by scientific research,
militarization, resource extraction,
and even tourism. We hope to use
our expertise in embodiment, percep-
tion, and purpose to contribute to
humanity’s relationship with space.
We are uniquely situated to think
of space not as something to under-
stand, conquer, or explore but as
an environment that changes us
and teaches us new things about
being human.

Thanks to Gaïa Maniquant-Rogozyk for
translation and to Megan Robertson for
transcripts and translations. We are
grateful for Kitsou’s profound teachings,
and we appreciate that this work would
not be possible without the efforts of many
people and explorers, past and present,
both in dance and in the sciences.

Moving and Thinking with Fascia
Interview with Ray Chung on the intersection of fascia and
Contact Improvisation training

How do dance artists move with emerging
21st-century biology? What forms of
articulation emerge in their practice? The
following is an interview I conducted with
dancer and educator Ray Chung over email
during research for my doctorate thesis
called “Interconnective (T)issues: Bodily
Experiments and the Affective Entanglements
between Fascia Research and Dance Improvi-
sation.” Prior to this exchange, I had taken
numerous classes with Ray in Berkeley and
crossed paths with him at the Fascia Research
Congresses. I was interested in probing deeper
into the ways improvising with fascia has
allowed him to make new distinctions and
new bodily articulations that contribute to the
emergence of his fascial sense-ability. These
distinctions also contributed to innovations in
training and teaching Contact Improvisation.

Kevin: Perhaps we could start with the following question
to understand your history. Can you remember when
you first started hearing about fascia in the dance world
you are in? I frequently notice the concept floating
around the Contact Improvisation (CI) community.
What kinds of sensibilities do you cultivate in relation
to it in your dance teaching and training?
Ray: I hadn’t really heard much about fascia in the CI
or dance community until I started incorporating that
information into my own practice and teaching. I had
been reviewing material from the Fascia Congress in
Vancouver in 2012 and was inspired to include that
knowledge in my teaching, which already included
biotensegrity and related info.
In the mid- to late ’80s, I had learned about fascia
first-hand when I received the complete Rolfing series
and started learning some of the techniques to facilitate
myofascial release.
I feel that the awareness and perception of the moving
body is so heightened and enhanced through knowledge
and experience of fascia—from how it relates and is
connected to proprioception, to biomechanics, to my own
practice of shiatsu and bodywork. Since I learned CI and
shiatsu in parallel, I found many similarities, and each
practice informed the other. Learning more about the role
of fascia in the movements of my own body and in how to
connect to other bodies through healing and dancing has
enhanced both experiences.

Fascia is often called connective tissue—
the viscous goop that connects, divides,
and slides between muscles, organs, skin,
and cells. It has also been found to be
active, intelligent, communicative, and
a sensory organ; sometimes three, some-
times many, and sometimes one; liquid,
solid, and mucus. The scientific research
on fascia is still in formation, existing in
what historian of science Thomas Kuhn
called a “pre-paradigmatic state,” in which
multiple views exist simultaneously and
where terminology and methods are
in flux.

What kind of practices have you cultivated to help
dancers think and move in relation to fascia? I am
thinking about different scores in relation to fascia,
but perhaps “scores” might not be the right word for
how you work with it.
I guess the strategies that I use most in my teaching start
with learning about the physiology of the fascia—cells, gel,
and fibers. I am focusing primarily on the gel, or ground
substance, as a lubricating layer that acts as a cushion
between one’s skin and the underlying structure, noticing
the difference between compressive and shear forces as
one’s weight is transferred into the floor, and then how
sliding or “floating” on the gel layer facilitates this transfer.
In addition, I offer how experience of the gel can help one
fall safely into the floor.
A “score” I sometimes use is an exploration of ways
that fascia/connective tissue can provide support through
the spine through the intention of reaching through the
spine and limbs into the floor and into a partner’s body
when finding/giving moving support. Playing with the
different intentions of pushing, leaning, or reaching gives
an experience of how the fascia can be engaged to greater
or lesser degrees, and how that facilitates more ease and
efficiency when receiving and giving forces through
different parts of the body.
image courtesy R. Chung
Fascia is often called connective tissue—
the viscous goop that connects, divides,
and slides between muscles, organs, skin,
and cells. It has also been found to be
active, intelligent, communicative, and
a sensory organ; sometimes three, some-
times many, and sometimes one; liquid,
solid, and mucus. The scientific research
on fascia is still in formation, existing in
what historian of science Thomas Kuhn
called a “pre-paradigmatic state,” in which
multiple views exist simultaneously and
where terminology and methods are
in flux.1
—Dumit and O’Connor, 2016
Biotensegrity
Kevin: You bring in the concept of “biotensegrity.”
What did this way of thinking about the body offer
your teaching that was different than what you were
using previously?
Ray: I had previously focused on the skeletal and muscu-
lar systems more separately, and connective tissue hardly
at all. I had been focused on vertical alignment in terms of
stacked elements relative to gravity.
Thinking more architecturally about the physiology
prompted me to utilize teaching aids in the form of
tensegrity models and Chinese finger puzzles to model or
represent connective tissue networks/sheathing around
the spine and other joints.
Currently, I’m exploring how the skeletal, muscular,
and connective tissue systems relate synergistically as a
tensegrity structure, which can act independent of gravity.
How do you bring the concept of biotensegrity into your
dance practice? When is it useful to think with biotenseg-
rity—for example, in weight-bearing situations? And
what in the model do you specifically focus on?
An image I often use is “swimming in your skin,” where
an awareness of an articulation between the skin and the
underlying structure is mediated by the connective tissue
gel, similar to floating on the gel. I use this in conjunction

with the image of the bones suspended and floating in
the connective tissue network, all acting synergistically
to mediate forces, gravitational or otherwise, that come
in contact with the body, and how the body responds to
these forces. This is conducive to creating a sense of being
omnidirectionally responsive to forces coming from
anywhere, as well as creating a sense of lightness and ease
in movement. Consequently, as weight is introduced to a
part of the body, the body reaches out to meet that force,
rather than bracing or tightening.
Cultivating Felt Images
Kevin: What are some of your techniques for training
a dancer to notice the difference between compressive
and shear force? Do you invite them to imagine the gel?
Sense into it? What language do you use?
Ray: I often begin with a physiological description of
the components of the connective tissue (CT). The three
primary components of CT being the cells (fibroblasts,
adipocytes, macrophages, chondroblasts, osteoblasts),
which provide metabolism; the fibers (collagen, elastin),
which provide the mechanical properties; and the gel
(extracellular matrix [ECM], ground substance), which
provides viscosity and plasticity.
Then I have students touch their own body structure
before exchanging hands-on exploration of each other’s
bodies, focusing on the viscoelastic quality of the fascia on
a local as well as a global (full-body) scale. Locally, explora-
tion involves pinching, pulling, rubbing, and sliding on
surfaces of the body initially, and then with the hands on
various body parts. Globally, it’s connecting the whole
body together through one specific point or small area as
it’s contacting the floor or a body and noticing how one’s
body responds as a tensegrity system. After some time,
they work solo in relation to the floor, noticing how the
gel cushions the bony parts of the body (back of the skull,
elbows, sacrum, spine, scapula, knees, greater trochanter,
iliac crest, etc.) and helps them experience the floor as
softer and more welcoming as they move across, into, and
out of it.
The language I use is fairly descriptive, with some
imagery but not a lot. Invoking the images of “swimming
in your skin,” “floating on the gel,” “floating bones,” is as
imagistic as I tend to get.
I think about “shear” as the thing that breaks tensegrity
models. I am interested in different strategies dancers
use to attend to shear force and perhaps change it so it
can be dispersed in their architecture. Can you articu-
late how shear force feels different than compression?
Shear forces are essentially sliding forces, or forces acting
at an angle to a support structure. Compressive forces
tend to restrict movement, whereas shear forces tend to
be conducive to movement. As I rest the back of my head
on the floor, the main force I experience is compressive.
As my head begins to slide (not roll), the sliding of the
gel absorbs the shearing force into the surrounding
tissue. The movement of the parts surrounding the gel
(skull bone, scalp) tends to spread sliding forces into and
through the gel. The viscoelasticity of the gel absorbs the
energy of deformation of the tissue by the weight or forces
acting upon it.
I love the description of sliding or floating on the gel
layer. Can you articulate what this might do or feel like
in practice?
The sensation of floating or sliding on the gel is not unlike
sitting on ice and sliding on your bum when one falls to
the ice while ice skating. The amount of sliding is limited
due to the fact that the actual slide is occurring within the
body rather than external to it. Due to the elasticity of the
skin, the slide sensation is also partially the viscoelastic
stretch of the skin, and the limit of stretch causes a dampen-
ing of the slide to “rebound” in the opposite direction. One
can play with the rebound and find a resonance within

the viscoelasticity while moving in relation to the floor
or a partner. This rebound is similar to the sensation of
landing smoothly and silently when jumping up from and
down into the floor repeatedly. The rebound can also aid
the movements, as the energy stored in the stretching
structures can be released and redirected as the bouncing
movements continue.
Floating Bones, or “Fascial Sense-ability”
Kevin: You write above about fascia offering a different
way of being in relationship with others (and perhaps
the floor). Could you articulate how thinking with fascia
allows dancers to come into contact differently than
when thinking through muscles or bones?
Ray: An increased awareness of the layer between the
skin and the underlying structures can facilitate a greater
sense of layers and levels of weight and touch. The transi-
tion of forces from a localized scale to a more global scale
within the body relates equally to another’s body in the
situation of a Contact Improvisation dance. Connecting
to other bodies on the layer of the fascia, and especially
the gel, elicits a greater sense of fluidity, softness, ease,
efficiency, and release in the joints. The image of the bones
suspended or floating within our softer tissue structures
is another way of thinking differently about the functional
relationship between the bones and muscles. Especially as
the fascia is such an integral part of all muscle, one can’t
really speak about muscle without speaking about fascia.
This also speaks to how softer tensile structures like
tendons, ligaments, and fascia can support weight
without collapsing and are more adaptable to changes
in direction, force, and timing—the omnidirectional
responsiveness inherent in tensegrity structures.
The fascia is the proprioceptive substrate of mecha-
noreceptors. So in the case of proprioception, the sensory
elements are more diffuse throughout the body rather
than localized around the joints.
Also, the systems approach to the body as a syner-
getic whole differentiated into various functional forms
gives a radically different experience and felt sense of
the body and how it functions than the more traditional
anatomical view of the body as individual parts assembled
together. Emphasis is on integrity, continuity, connectivity,
architecture, wholeness, rather than compatibility of
components. Much like being waves rather than particles.
Thinking with waves reminds me of the following
quote from Ludwig von Bertalanffy, founder of general
systems theory:
What is described in morphology as organic forms
and structures is in reality a momentary cross
section through a spatio-temporal pattern. What are
called structures are slow processes of long duration,
functions are quick processes of short duration. If
we say that a function such as the contraction of a
muscle is performed by a structure, it means that
a quick and short process wave is superimposed
on a long-lasting and slowly running wave.2
As we dance and move through space interactively, our
wave nature overlaps and resonates with others reverber-
ating and echoing off each other and the environment.

Kevin: This reminds me of how fascia mediates
exchanges differently. I think of fascia as the material
of the middle (or of the relation). Can you give an
example of how attending to fascia changes the felt
sense of a dance duet?
Ray: The fascia has been described by doctor and medical
anthropologist Jaap van der Wal as the “organ of innerness,”
an organ of connectedness.3
A greater sense of permeability and diffusivity within
my body is created when I attend to the fascia. This gives
me a sense of a larger interior space, which provides more
opportunity for movement initiated from the interior,
and thus makes me more available for movement and
forces from the exterior to connect to my interior space.
The interior space being not just the deepest innermost
regions but also all the regions between the skin and the
deepest. Also, the experience of effort and strain is less
localized within my body and spreads out to more regions,
giving the feeling that more of my body supports and is
connected to a particular effort or movement.
I am interested in the play between reading texts on
fascia, moving with them, and then returning to the texts.
Could you give an example of how you do this? How do you
know when a practice helps you think with a concept?
My guiding principle is that “learning is experience,
the rest is information.” I think Einstein said this. My
intention is to create a frame, or points, of reference from
information about the body. Then I would explore, or have
students explore within said frame of reference through
moving and attending to how they respond and adapt.
In this case, information gleaned from research can
be used to narrow in on a specific frame. One example is
falling, and how the experience of moving through, on,
over the gel reveals possibilities of how to relate and
connect to the floor, falling safely.
There are usually overlapping frames of reference,
since the body is always a frame as well. Another frame
that I could be working with simultaneously is of tenseg-
rity and how awareness of this architecture interplays
with the gel. I find it best to stick to one or two frames at
any given time. After some period of exploration, a time
for reflection and inspection of the experience is articulated
in writing and/or feedback with another person. Then I
revisit the information in the text to see if my experience
corroborates or contradicts it. This often gives more
information about how to proceed.
One indicator of the “success” of the endeavor is
whether the process has been transformative for me. Have
any of my perceptions, viewpoints, or experience of myself
been transformed in the process?
photo © Levi Dershowitz
Ray Chung, Leviathan Studio, Lasqueti Island, Canada, August 2015.
You write that in relation to proprioception, the
fascial sensory elements are more diffuse through
the body rather than localized around the joints. Does
attending to this sensory capability shift the timing of
a contact dance?
Using the sensory information from mechanoreceptors
helps in “seeing” with and through the body. When this
information, along with the interoceptive, expropriocep-
tive, and proprioceptive “sense,” is incorporated, I’ve
noticed there is a tendency of the experience of a contact
dance to shift more into “body time,” which tends to feel
slower than “clock time.” The more information processed
at once, the slower time seems to pass.
I am curious if you have thought of this in relation
to “mind” or “minding,” or a more central thinking/
dancing compared to a more diffuse thinking/dancing?
I often consider conscious awareness and thought as
more central, and the unconscious as more diffuse, and
often experience my dancing this way. When I focus more
conceptually (space, time, relationships, composition),
I experience dancing as more central. When I’m more
focused on sensation (weight, interoception), dancing is
experienced more internally and diffuse, in the sense that
the whole system is in tune and humming along with no
single aspect standing out more than another for very
long. I tend to correlate the central to external, and the
diffuse to internal. In practice, the challenge is often how
to integrate the inner and outer worlds, the central and
the diffuse aspects or qualities of our awareness. Is it
possible to be in both or must we oscillate between the two?

I think, especially in the context of performance, that
the integration of these aspects is essential, as there is so
much that happens beyond our conscious awareness and
control (the diffuse thinking), and our conscious aware-
ness (the central thinking) can attend to only a few items
at a time. Having an economy of consciousness is helpful,
while trusting that the diffuse bodymind is able to take
care of survival, technique, sustainability, etc.
Historian of the body, Shigehisa Kuriyama, writes about
how our concepts of the body pull along a certain kind
of self. For instance, he traces how the emergence of
muscles in ancient Greece pulled along the idea of a true
Greek man, with muscles as agents for autonomous will.
Could you describe the kind of subjectivity that thinking
with fascia pulls along in Contact Improvisation?
As my body is more than the sum of its parts, the contri-
bution of the various bodily systems creates a complex,
elaborate, and synergistic experience of wholeness,
coherence, coordination, and integrity, as I am not able
to functionally isolate systems from each other. As the
“organ of innerness,” fascia provides me with more of
a sense of connectedness between the outside and the
inside of my body.
Compared to former knowledge of the body, since
the time of the Greek muscle human, current knowledge
continues to provide novel images and experiences of the
body, such as the tensegrity human. Thus, the shift from
the dualistic worldview of the body composed of parts
making a whole organism to the complex view of the body
as differentiated from a single whole into functional
systems that interact synergistically. From this evolving
frame of reference, current concepts of the body continue
to transform and affect my sense and perception of move-
ment and embodiment as well as my practice of Contact
Improvisation.


Water Play: Change Gravity
by Petra Kuppers
As a disabled dancer growing older and (in my case)
heavier, CI can get hard. At a certain point, my personal
ratio of muscles to weight meant that many moves were
outside my reach. Traditional CI jams with jumping folks
were becoming dangerous to my slow floor being, with
my wheelchair by the side of the dance floor. I still love the
smaller CI jams, the listening-to-skin ones, the juiciness of
slowness. One of my ideal jams is the Oakland-based AXIS
Dance Company’s annual jam, which brings together
people with a wide range of mobilities but (often) with
decades of practice in listening bodily and being with
one another.
Since it hasn’t proved easy for me to change my body
and its pain levels, I changed gravity instead. Now, I often
move in or lead contact sessions in water, and a whole new
realm has opened up. If you haven’t yet, try it…have your
jam in the pool.
1. Find warm water. Some like to engage in communal
corporeal listening in a freezing forest. But for most of
us, a warmer environment is kinder to our muscles. See
if there’s a therapy pool somewhere: it’s fun to remake
a therapy site into a creative adventure. The deeper the
pool, the better. Then there are sun-warmed summer
lakes, sweet inland oceans, or saltwater expanses. One
of my cherished water-CI memories is moving with
disability dance elder Emery Blackwell in his hot tub in
Eugene, Oregon.
2. Bring goggles and nose clips. Don’t forget the nose clips:
it’s not so much fun to get water up your nose when
you flip.
 Listen, lean, and enjoy the pull of water around you.
Contact elementals. Familiarize yourself with your nerve
endings blooming into the warmth, into the liquid. Feel
your blood. Have a small dance. Feel yourself in contact
with your first partners: your spine, water, and air.
4. The starting position for muscular movement is different
from traditional land CI openings. Instead of back-to-
back and reach-across rolling contact, you will likely
need more leverage to go under and find movement
impetus. Sometimes when contacters move in the pool
for the first time, I notice that buoyancy can be a chal-
lenge, and the dance stays at the surface. To get into
all dimensions, here is a useful starting exercise: One
person stands solidly grounded in the pool. The second
person takes a breath, goes down, and holds on to the
first person’s leg at the pool’s bottom. Then, the second
person rolls forward into the liquid, using the other
person’s leg as fulcrum. The first person pays attention,
ensures there’s no panic, helps to provide anchor. Glide.
Expand. Touch. Alternate. Sense. Offer yourself for
weight and buoyancy. Stay curious to what happens.
What is contact here, in the water, when weight and
momentum follow new rules?
5. Your breath comes naturally. The most important
movement rule of underwater CI: no leg kicking (ouch).
6. Listen. Stay tuned to the elements and each other.
Wonder. Let the breath be your guide.
7. Water is life. See how water CI influences your land
practices. May the contact field of relations widen:
who protects our air, water, earth, land, and bodies?
Give thanks.


And then you say, so what’s the message, and I say I don’t know.
Usually I figure it out right at the second I arrive.
It appears in my mind right at the second I arrive.
Like the message is something that was entrusted to me by something that didn’t
want me to know it until I was here.
And you say, sort of like a security system, and I say, kind of.
Also like a game or like just old manners.
Just the way things are done, you say
And I say yeah, just the way things have always been done.
And you say I’ve been waiting for you to arrive
And I say how did you know I was coming
And you say, I’ve been sending signals.
And I say sending signals or requests?
And you say that in a way they’re kind of the same thing, but no, signals
And I look at you and you say, signals so someone would know I was here.
And I say that’s how they must have known you were here.
At this point, we understand that it’s time to start the observations.
We line the room with custom.
Things ring and shine.
Are you ready?
I say.
Are you ready?
You say.
We close our eyes and wait.
I think nothing is happening but it’s hard to tell.
You’re not real, you say
And I say, what? and you say
You’re not real, I made you, with my mind
And I say that’s not true. Try me.
And I say, and anyway even if you had made me with your mind, which you didn’t,
it still wouldn’t mean I wasn’t real because you would have made me and things that
are made are real that’s a rule about reality: it’s what gets made.

(I sleep, dreaming I’m awake, then wake up in my
dream and dream I can’t sleep.
Then I wake and can’t sleep.)
You get very close to me and say into my ear that you
want to take me to the cosmoplane wall, that it will cure
my sleeplessness will I please let you do it.
And I have always wanted to go to the wall—
But I say: I hear the wall is no good this time of year
You have to go in the right season
or it’s impossible to see.
You won’t see it and you will glide right past
Into endless space never to return.
And you say, those are just stories
And I say, those are true stories
And that I know at least twenty assorted who have gone
to see it and never returned
And you say, well maybe they just
didn’t want to go back
That’s not proof
But I say, it’s proof enough for me.
Then you tell me, be quiet.
Because the wall’s right here, towering above us.
The wall’s right here, you say.
And you can see it if you open the right part of your
eyes.
I don’t have a progress report to give. It’s one of
those long stretches when nothing happens visibly
in the astrogarden. I’m letting the last blooms take
their decay plumes at negative three and I can’t get
out there and rake until the decay is complete or at
least in its last sixty-fourth. Meanwhile I’m hoping
no space trash—you do occasionally see it even this
far out.
I haven’t made decisions yet about what to plant
for the next calendrical observations. It’s a fallow
period. It’s impossible to mark progress in a fallow.
You’re either in it or you’re not but there isn’t a
metric for its duration or a way to note its slope.
One day you plant and then it’s over.
Everyone has their own approach to the mysteries
of creation. That’s mine, bordering on a kind of
faith in the lined interior of boredom. I’ll take the
fallow voluntarily. But also I’m going fallow because
the next observations are for the Battle of Rabbit’s
Bluff, the most important battle and the hardest to
understand. Honestly it’s intimidating in a way that
makes me freeze up. I don’t know how to do a cliff
and a drop and a tundrally tunnel in non-obvious
ways. So far the only thing I’ve figured out is that it
all needs to be icewhite with only halos of green
and pink, so momentary you almost think you
were mistaken in identifying color at all. I’m unsure
how to produce the tones I want: a blood pink, a
mournful green. It’s hard to make that feeling come
out of those colors without just tipping stupid and
garish. I’m sure most of the memorial gardens will
be in the standard black with silver dust and pink
festoons, but I see it icewhite.
But that’s all I see. Formless color. So I’m training on
the dances while I wait to see more. I found some
old instruction pamphlets from before they started
making the instruction holograms. I recorded
myself reading them so I could dance along to my
recording without having to keep looking back
at the paper. I like it when someone leads me as
long as it doesn’t go all the way to manipulation.
Suggestions, invitation, subtle coaxing. Leave me
a little room to follow you in. I’ll play one now. If
you’re listening, you should practice. There are
hologram tutorials in all the ship banks that you can
watch if these instructions don’t make sense.
I’ve been thinking about the memorial dances and
if they would also be meaningful to me if they were
advance memorials for myself. Are they letters for
you or are they advance memorials to myself, like
letters I’m leaving for myself as if I’ll be able to read
when I’m a ghost just a decay plume slowly dilut-
ing down to a remnant crystal of fine minerals that
won’t travel? Anyway.

Listen.
But when it calls, stop talking.
It will stop calling if you try to capture its voice.
If the loon calls out, don’t try to record it.
You are falling down along through the hole.
And you are.
Particle pinpoint precipice floating party. The vastness is.
And some things go on ending while others do not.
Here’s where it splits.
And now that you are gliding the hole, you still don’t know because it is lightless, it is the end of all things.
Where one thing gives way to another.
And all those years.
All what years?
All those years.
You never knew what thing gives way or what it gives way to.
Down a hole which is a tunnel which is a slide which is a place.
Backed up into it, against my will now I find myself falling backwards.
Some part of you will know: this is the hole.
You will try to reinstate the old habits but you won’t be able to.
You have to be backed up into it, against your will.
Every movement you make looking like the others you have made.
The hole is a hole in this consistency.
That’s what you have to imagine.
You can’t get to Rabbit’s Bluff by thinking it, by wanting it.
And if you were to aim into it, cut into it, slice the wind in order to navigate.
To not be buffeted.
What would that even look like?
Are there drifts, is there a cosmic wind out here pushing us off course?
And you wonder is there variation or slow progression or is it endlessly recursive?
Everything you say now is a recurrence.
You can hear water lapping though you’re not near a body of water.
The hole is not a circle.
Why should a hole take the form of a circle?
But you do imagine it that way.
You imagine it in the limited way you have for imagining things.


CQ 44

Borne on the winds of the ’60s counterculture, a generation of
aspiring Western concert dancers like myself took on the task of
reimagining the codes of our trainings. How did we want to live in
our bodies? What kind of body did we want to cultivate? How could
we speak and listen to our bodies in a gentler way? How could we
change the language and landscape of our oral tradition? How would
this translate into performance?
Rooted in the necessity for invention, improvisational dance, in
myriad forms, emerged as an excavating tool for these questions and
has been developing on the sidelines of mainstream dance culture
for half a century now. Little did we know in ’75, when the Contact
Newsletter was born as a grassroots networking and research rag
and then, barely two years later, slid so gently into being “a vehicle
for moving ideas” for a much wider conversation on improvisational
and somatic approaches in the field, that the embodied languaging
within its covers would become an archive of a paradigm shift in
the art of dance. And here we stand.
We never dreamed we’d stop the press on CQ as a biannual
journal for reasons other than economic unsustainability in the guise
of rising printing and mailing costs. However, with a shift in the
needs and energy of your two dogged and largely volunteer coeditor/
publishers (Nancy and I), we hasten to look for ways to continue our
mission (read our statement on the back cover!) . And right before
our eyes are the dynamic opportunities of web publishing. While the
thought of moving online once felt like a defeat—of print, that is—
it now beckons a renewal that will foster fresh formats for participa-
tion and expand our collective imagination into new communities of
readers and contributors.
Within my body, CQ has always been an adventure into the
unknown, a dance with survival, an artists’ project, a collaborative
body of work that requires regular recommitment. As we take our
first step into new territory with you, our readers, your embrace of
our mission will be felt through your continuing dialogue with the
materials we scribe in our collective body’s memory.
Thank you for your abiding support during this transition.
Lisa Nelson


Might the “family” of movement artists who have gathered
around CQ ’s watering hole over the last 4.5 decades and younger
artists setting off in new directions want CQ ’s “vehicle for moving
ideas” to stay on the road and serve and swerve? Might there be
excitement for a newly hatched CQ , one that is beyond what we’ve
imagined so far?
The arrival of new forms and structures for CQ ’s continuity will
be influenced by many factors, including YOU. This coming year, many
forces will be interacting to reenvision CQ , including our brilliant
advisory board and an engaged group of editor-dancers. Opening
the space for radical change is a hugely generative, difficult, hopeful,
practical, scary, and exciting time.
Our first step, to give us time to reinvent ourselves, is two-
pronged. Next issue, our 45th Anniversary issue (!), will be the last
print journal of the current incarnation of CQ . Concurrently, we’ll be
greatly expanding our online publication—CQ Unbound—with a
dynamic collective of former and new editors.
We hope you’ll stay with us—as subscribers, writers, donors—
and be part of this monumental turning.
I stand with the Rabbit and the Muffin (see photo)—between
the already and the not yet—on the bluff, doing the Small Dance of
balancing with gravity, letting all the dances I’ve ever had and will
ever have make a new, complex, indecipherable movement, one in
which all is in motion and at rest. Unspeakable home.*
Nancy Stark Smith

Artist Statement:
My practice is based in black study
and a desire to occupy performance.
i use performing as a vehicle to undo, reorient, and
blur conceptions of subjectivity,
whether as a black subject, or in any subject/object
relation.
i do this with the presence of an audience in mind.
creative processes and works are fugitive practices,
like strategic scaffoldings building upon each other.
they fabulate against time to question ritual v.
performance
and they consider the presence of location
for generating escape hatches from consumption.
location might mean the performance site (and its
history),
the archive (and its limitations),
or circumstances of contemporary life (and the
Anthropocene).
collaboration is always present as a desire and means
for worlding these abstractions.
collectively, the contours of these settings become
figured and real,
and negotiating these connections is how i think of
the choreographic—
as playfully untethered to the corporeal so to be
somehow everywhere but nowhere.
—Jonathan González

In late November 2018, I witnessed a version of Jonathan
González’s work cancel as part of Riff Talks_07: Tipping
Utopia (a weekend of performances, talks, and workshops
produced at the School for Contemporary Dance and
Thought in Northampton, Massachusetts). The following
day, I took a workshop led by Jonathan where we listened
to the space and each other, practiced breathing as an arc
between two deaths, looked at maps of Western Massachu-
setts from various authors and periods of history, and went
on solo sound walks through the neighborhood, which we
then transposed back into the studio space in simultaneous
cacophony. In early February 2019, Jonathan returned to
Northampton and the School for Contemporary Dance and
Thought to perform as part of the HUT series (co-curated by
Jake Meginsky and Jennifer Polins). I sat on the floor close to
Jonathan and witnessed as they read text speaking of matri-
lineal ancestry and relationships from their cell phone. I sat
transfixed, listening to the creak of Jonathan’s brown leather
pants and boots as they oscillated thickly in and out of the
floor, lights rising and fading all the while. My three brief
encounters with Jonathan’s work caused me to lean in and
want to be in dialogue. The following are traces from our
subsequent email conversations.
—Meredith Bove, CQ


Meredith Bove:
I’m curious about notions of sight, the unseen, and/or partial
obscurity in your work. Both performances I’ve witnessed by
you have taken place in environments where the audience
has to work to actually see the body, to have your body come
into visibility. Are you interested in the sensory tuning that
might occur when vision is obscured (for instance, height-
ened auditory sensing)? And/or are you interested in using
lighting/darkness as tools for challenging histories of perfor-
mance where the body is typically “on view” or available for
visual consumption?
Jonathan González:
There’s a lot to riff on inside of opacity and the situation
of staging, the stage, and being staged, as William Pope.L
says.1 Let’s talk about the theater and theatrical event as
a physical and psychological apparatus where the social
negotiations of being together come with all the baggage of
its containment, while simultaneously having the potential
of suspension and of falling apart. I am speaking alongside
the Western classical innovation of the theater and the
purpose of culture-making as a measure of indoctrination
and as a vehicle for institutionalizing ideals of civility. And
then I am taking that a step further to deal with black
subjectivity and fugitive practice—or methods of being in
the world that elude whiteness through fabulating other
matrices of being and black enclosures. Part of fugitive
practice is to choose marronage2 from hegemonic society
and to reorient to that traditional container and how we
situate ourselves within it. In this way, performance per-
forms outside of the theatrical arc, as it decenters your
gaze or my gaze or the performer via an audience gaze—
no one object is primary and there is no singular meaning.
Instead, the potential in performance is that no one is
autonomously a voyeur or performer; you as an audience
member are also witnessed and implicated in the unfold-
ing narratives, as is the performer. This bears importance
to me since I am thinking of the stage as being located
nowhere as a poetic apparatus, and yet everywhere as
praxis. We are performing beyond the theater itself. This
also feels essential, as fugitive practice is aligned with how
I compose performance—meaning how the creative process
strategizes processes of labor and how the material arrives
in consideration of an audience, with the flexibility to
change in real time.
In the theater, and in the general construction of
performance, that material stuff of seeing and being—
the collaborative and potentially antagonistic, erotic
umbilical thread of being and being seen as a performer
with audience—that stuff is generative and essential to
why I recognize “performance” as a funny word. Perfor-
mance is a vehicle I return to when thinking of sociality,
of living at all, and composing. Like this past summer,
2018, I was an artist-in-residence at NARS Foundation3
thinking through what the referent of a white box studio
space and object-oriented practice of exhibition could
mean in relationship to these questions. My studio was
a 10' x 8' open-air space, and it became a locus for all my
materials, including my body. Gradually, the floor became
a tarp-covered dance floor as I painted the walls with
motor oil, lacquer, and compost. These materials traveled
from the surface of my skin, leaving traces from each
motion of those choreographies made in that place. The
circumstances of that austere white space and I started
to duet, and I desired to know how those corporeal
developments could remain, in the visual sense. This
felt necessary, and playful too.
To get back to my point on the spectator-performer
interrogation, the public exhibition that closed my resi-
dency came, and I was troubled with how to represent this
time of creative enclosure and precarity into an isolated
object in the main gallery. It didn’t make sense to leave the
site. We, the architecture and I, had wrestled to encounter
those grounds of intimacy. Similarly, I recognized how I was
wrestling with those familiar constrictions of blackness,
and my allegiances to black-being, in the entanglements
of notions of abstraction. So the work, cancel, developed
as a performance without a body present, accessible to
a viewer only by peering through a peephole drilled into
the adjoining wall. It was marketed as a performance
nevertheless, with the scent of soil, sweat, and motor oil
accessible through the peephole too. I reference Jab Jab,
a long-standing tradition charting the arrival of slaves
to the Caribbean and the establishment of the annual
festival, Carnaval, in which performers cover themselves
in motor oil and chocolate and carry raw meat in their
mouths to physically animate the devil they were deemed
to be by the slave masters—and see, these folks celebrate.
This is costume, or armor, and it’s not for white people; it
functions to create enclosures where whiteness could be
unrecognizable and illegible. This was my referent for the
motor oil in cancel.
Those who visited shared the effort to see the figura-
tions the choreography demanded upon their eyes, and
the metaphorical thread of the peephole to intrusion and
the erotic. Most importantly to me, the labor of witnessing
made the spectator complicit in how they identified the
material, as much as their relation to consumption of the
work. Fugitive practice is about evading capture, and the
stage is an iconic site of capture. I’m thinking about
Josephine Baker, Nina Simone, Robert Johnson…the list
of black artists who have been consumed by the stage
could go on....
So, what I’m trying to get to is the performance as a
mechanism of intervention to get down to the subalternate
level, or that place that is also labeled through the work of
Fred Moten and Stefano Harney as “the undercommons”4
—the situation of black life and the material capacity of
blackness that resides under these hegemonic structures
by choice, like the underground railroad.
The material capacity of blackness is to say that
black-being and blackness are not the same. Blackness is
not about the racial demarcation of peoples by pigmen-
tation. Blackness is the set of virtual, cultural, and social
negotiations constructed around and through acts of
appropriation, affecting those people who are black,
resulting in the circumstances of a social death. Therefore,
black-being is the people, and blackness is not predicated
on the body or presence of a body. A dear friend of mine,
Victor Peterson II, would call this place the black vector,
naming blackness as an entry point of virtual consider-
ations.5 Blackness is a material reality, a performed
reality, which is galvanized under numerous streams
of commerce, with appropriation being only one kind of
exchange. The stage as a place is trapped in this consump-
tive feedback loop of taking from blackness—from cool,
from a posturing, and desirability of the virile—rather
than from black people.
The issue I am approaching is how to be inside the
circumstances of performing in the social sphere, in
what W. E. B. DuBois refers to as double-consciousness.
And then, being involved in the circulation of creative
work for performance when I understand that both
5 Victor Peterson II, “Raising Pure Hell: A General Theory of
Articulation, the Syntax of Structural Overdetermination, and
the Sound of Social Movements” (research project, Department
of English Language and Literature, King’s College London).
spaces—the social real as well as the stage—are predi-
cated on a zero-sum game—blackness being the site of
extraction with no reciprocity.
That extractive feedback loop, the act of taking with
no reciprocity, is something we also identify with in our
anthropocentric relations to the earth—our ideas of what
the earth might be. Therefore, we can identify a thread
between the lives of those considered zero, or black
people—also to say the compound of peoples who nego-
tiate the duress of capitalism and the white imaginary
(or the public secrets engendering a dominant cultural
narrative)—linked to the site of the earth. It is necessary
to consider that the gendered representation of the black
female is always the primary site linked to the earth.
I’m thinking of the story of Marie-Joseph Angélique in
Montreal, referenced in Katherine McKittrick’s Demonic
Grounds, in which the slave Marie-Joseph Angélique
chooses to burn the site of her home where she is an
enslaved groundskeeper in an attempt to flee to freedom.
She burns down the entirety of downtown Montreal in
her second attempt and is found in the deep woods before
being taken to be publicly lynched. See, she and the land
are in collaboration to be free, and both suffer an insur-
mountable ache to be “released” in that Nina Simone, “I
Shall Be Released” provocation to a realm beyond white
imagination. I recognize that performance can access this
space, if only during the interims it intervenes upon our
social negotiations, for a poetic articulation of the walls
come tumbling down.
Many of my works are made in darkness or high-
intensity light, or include costuming with lighting
apparatuses affixed to the performer rather than the rig.
This is notable in Obeah, Lyric baby, and ZERO. In ZERO,
the performer Rena Anakwe traverses the stage in a bub-
ble, lit by dim hues of cerulean, magenta, and green. This
solo is act three within a four-part work that premiered
at Danspace Project in NYC in 2018. Rena is costumed
in a sound-light activated wearable bodysuit enclosed in
a bubble containing water 12" deep. The water has been
treated with liquid that illuminates under UV light to
reveal a sky-blue tone at her feet. Act three is an articu-
lation of water and bioluminescence, but we ended up
calling it the Cosmic Wail. ZERO was made in an effort to
research the architectural history of St. Marks Church as
a slave-trafficking quarters established by early settlers of
the Peter Stuyvesant congregation. In ZERO, we approach
the notion of a liturgical mass in reference to the founding
of the church as Episcopalian, to undo the sanctity of
the sacred space, and to reveal the controversies of its
inception. Rena’s recitation of the black spiritual “Go to
Sleep, Little Baby” becomes a gesture for those enslaved
women who labored as wet nurses on the second floor of
the church each Sunday during mass—“out of sight, but
Performer Rena Anakwe in ZERO, Danspace Project, NYC, 2018.
within ear shot,” as the ledger states. Within this bubble,
Rena becomes synonymous with the shadows and the
sounds of other women through vocally synthesized
manipulations, and a metaphorical mother to the
church-space trapped within this superficial bubble.
I think of obscurity and cannot help but think of the
lantern laws in the post-antebellum Northeast United
States, above the Mason-Dixon line when freed blacks were
mandated to carry lanterns after dusk in order to be iden-
tified. Bodies in shadow became synonymous with objects
of light. There is something poetic and real about this.
Illegibility is a source in my work because it is
rooted in a desire for other kinds of legibility to emerge.
Making work with this demand is generative, and it is also
an escape route—a hatchway through the performance
in real-time toward another site of potential. Illegibility
serves as a way to encounter being both with and against
an audience; against agreed socialities and representa-
tions sometimes named the white gaze; against canons
of artistic production prescriptive of an idea of us, which
is black first. To be clear, I’m not gesturing to a kind of
Afro-future, or site for utopia, or cathartic release; it’s
about presence and being present where I am with an
audience in the exchange, to fuck up the time continuum
as it relates to certainty and “consent not to be a single
being,”6 as Fred Moten’s text is titled. I’m thinking and
practicing through these ways of working where, in
performance, there’s the material of a reality, and the
matter of change, and the situation of an audience,
and the notion of a “between us.” Each feels essential.
Meredith:
I experience your work existing on/in multiple time scales;
as a viewer, I have felt invited to drop into time outside of
what I experience in my everyday. I feel invited to consider
history and lineage, and to cultivate an awareness of what
has/might have come before the performative “moment”
that I’m witnessing. I also experienced some of these ideas
embedded in the workshop I took with you in November—the
consideration of layered histories existing in the body and
in the present moment, and how cartographic practices are
one way to re-chart some of the histories that are present but
not named. Any of this resonating?
Jonathan:
All of it resonates. I have a question for you: How do
you know when you have recognized the aesthetic or
conceptual proposal for a future in a work? What does
the possibility of futurity formalize in performance?
Meredith:
I think I begin to perceive a proposal for futurity in a work
when I see dismantling or critique of established norms,
whether performative, social, etc. This might be formal,
messing with expectations of time or action within the
performative event, or messing with space and being seen.
When an artist is working against conventions that have
become wrapped up in generalized audience expectations,
which over time have perhaps become subconsciously codified
into some kind of unspoken yet internalized “performative
agreement” (e.g., audience will come; they will witness a
moving body; there will be a beginning, middle, and end;
viewers will be invisible/anonymous; there will be legible or
recognizable devices for producing meaning/feeling that we
also experience in movies, theater, music, etc.), then I feel an
invitation to consider what else is possible, and this invitation
to consider what else is possible orients me to futurity.
Because of this disruption of expectation, I experience
proposals for futurity in works that make space for “ failure,”
in works not meeting standards of performance that have
been inscribed and reinscribed by consumers and artists
in the performance marketplace. Performative moments
that fail to live up to established expectations force me as a
viewer to confront my own internalized, normalized value
system, and make space for something else to take root. I
also think there is something about work that exposes grief
that invites futurity for me. I think the act of grieving and
acknowledging loss, suffering, and violence allow for movement
toward an imagined “elsewhere.” Lack of acknowledgment
and lack of grieving make for reproducing the status quo.
Jonathan:
Hmm. I’m really taken by this—acknowledgment of self by
inviting grief, and grief as a measure to move toward
visioning futurity. There is a way that grief in our puritani-
cal construction resembles oversharing and a tumultuous
slope to ineffective emotional responses. That might be
capitalism more than puritanism, but they seem to be
collaborating. I agree, and am always trying to orient
pleasure and dynamism of experience in each work as a
way to know grief as a site of nuance and plurality. Grief is
the bearing of our everyday. It reveals our holistic capacity
to be alive outside the bounds of utility to each other. To
invite grief in these ways allows me to contemplate a
praxis of composing and living with and against
indoctrinations.
Do you think the circumstances of the stage continue
into our everyday? Is surviving a practice?


poem
Ploughing, opening grooves across the land,
turning the soil over.
Shattering its unity, its coherence,
its compactness. Crumbling it.
Like in a paced and forever slow churning,
blending air within it,
heavens introduced into the ground. The soil
made foam.
Ample and light, vibrant multiplicity,
assemblage of infinitesimal curds.
Leibniz’s sea, but made of earth:
“I like the example of the roaring noise of the
sea that acts on us when we are standing on
the shore. To hear this noise as we do, we have
to hear its parts, that is the noise of each wave,
although each of these little noises makes itself
known only when combined confusedly with
all the others [...] ” 1
Ploughed, the ground that appeared as a sealed
plane on which to stand sprouts into volume,
texture, juiciness. It breathes. It promises to
bear fruit.
In the freshly dug gap, seeds may nest.
In its aired thickness, roots may grow.
Water and oxygen circulating in the porous
depth of the soil, they find space and nurture
to expand.
Dancing requires ploughing. Turning the inside
out. Churning the sedimented compactness,
shattering the established surfaces that delineate,
enclose, separate. A place. A moment. People.
A self (an “I”).
Dancing means furrowing. Opening. Grooves
after grooves, across and into the givenness that
is the ground we stand on. Mixing up, blending,
the inside, the outside, the self, the other. Ploughed,
contours acquire volume, entities acquire
multiplicities, borders sprout into foamy thickness.
Ground is no more one ground, but a sea, expanse
of smithereens, a chorus. Interpenetrated streams
through which fertile promises circulate.
Multi-headed, the course of events pulls forward.
Dancing, I yoke myself to it. Attention is the plough-
share’s edge. Attention is that which penetrates and
cuts through. Cutting not to separate, but to make
way. To diffract the givenness and call for the
possibility of movement, circulation, connection.
Let them flow through, impregnate, imbue the
porous now.
With the compactness of self crumbled, a mushy
texture arises. Events take root.
Dancing, ploughing the situation I am made of,
I may be an erect groove, a granular openness,
welcoming movements, being a nest for them
to grow. Dancing, I may be a field, a place for
the space to resound, an environment for the
environment to bear fruit.

The sun hits hard. The sea is dead flat. Monotonous whispers. No wind. Sweat is streaming
down the man’s bare body. He is a king, yet behaves as a mad peasant. Vulnerable and pitiful.
Palamedes, emissary of King Agamemnon, looks at him, the sovereign of Ithaka, naked,
working in the peak of the heat. Painfully trying to plough a forever unproductive land: the
shore, made barren by the sea. The ploughshare manages only with difficulty to open grooves
into the ground, as it is yoked to the mismatched pair of an ox and a donkey. They pull
clumsily, with uneven power and pace. Moreover, what is sown in this impossible field is
salt, only salt, handfuls of it, sparkling when thrown in the air, just before spreading in an
immaculate but mocking constellation on the dark soil.
Palamedes needs this man, Odysseus, the wisest of them all. Kings Agamemnon and
Menelaus need him. Heroes Achilles, Patroclus and Ajax need him. They wait for his wit, his
measure, his command. His armies. They have to sail together to Troy. A war must happen,
the city must burn. But what to do now with this fool?
Soon, the emissary grows doubtful. Is this scene for real? He goes to the king’s palace,
finds his way to the sleeping baby heir—Telemachus—and brings him to the improper field.
Placing the boy in the trajectory of the plough, he then sits. He observes the heavy hooves
and sharp ploughshare approaching the child, round as a fruit.
The sun’s incandescence, the relentless repetitiveness of the surf, the sweat dripping from
the king’s body, the effort of the animals, the open rocky soil, the salt crystal seeds, the baby
peacefully sleeping a few steps away from possible death, threatened by his own dad. I was
durably marked by this scene since I first encountered it as a child, reading it around eight or
nine years old in Contes et Légendes du Monde Grec et Barbare, in the very same volume that
my dad had been reading at the same age some decades earlier and that I read to my son
not long ago.
It all works around mismatching. The episode draws its potency from the display of
powerlessness. The barrenness of the land, the inappropriateness of the effortful labor, the
vulnerability of the powerful, his insanity—he who should be a guide, the exposure finally
of a defenseless young life that should thrive. It is a spectacle of the unproductive, the
nonfunctional, the misfitting. All the more expressive in that it is set up around the cultivation
of that which should allow life to be sustained and to prosper—crops. And it is all the more a
spectacle indeed, that it is all a pretense. As Palamedes suspected when bringing Telemachus
to put the king’s alienation to test, Odysseus simulates in order to avoid joining the war.
No doubt, this story speaks to me of art. The cultivated madness, trustful in a labor
that goes nowhere and suspends functionality. The celebration of the mismatch, the lasting
insistence on that which doesn’t work.
Andreï Tarkovsky’s final movie, The Sacrifice, dwells amongst similar tropes. A patriarch and his
young son, the urge to avoid a war, the performed madness, and the efforts to cultivate what is
irredeemably unproductive. The opening of the movie shows a man, the father, on a shore. He
is planting a dead tree with the affectionate help of his seven-year-old son, who is mute for the
time being as he recovers from surgery. In the last scene, at the very same location, the boy is
now alone, bringing with much effort two full buckets to water the same forever dry tree, plainly
erect in front of the expanse of sea. His dad has just been interned in a psychiatric hospital, as,
in a sacrifice to God he can’t explain to anyone, he burned down his own family’s house and
renounced speech, so that the Lord would prevent a terrifying war from bursting out.
As ignorant of his dad’s motivation as unperturbed, he trustfully and stoically carries on
the unproductive gesture, the dedicated care for that which bears no fruit. As the camera pans
to the dead branches appearing dark against the shimmering light of a sea goldened by the sun,
we are left with a picture reminiscent of traditional Japanese prints, bathed as it is in a muting
and perennial sobriety. In our minds though, we are still contemplating the potency of the
cultivated madness the dad transmitted to his son. The madness that grants meaning to that
which makes no sense and hears the promise within that which won’t flourish.

I walk across the neat corridor, leaving behind
the large changing room and its pungent
environment of sweat smell, impressive and
exotic testimony of the realm of adulthood. I must
be eight, my outfit feels large and stiff. I turn to my
right as I reach the double door, I stop just past
the threshold. With straight legs, feet together and
arms along my sides, I bend slightly forward. Now,
I may step into the room. Four, five steps to the
right and I stop again. Foot to foot, arms to sides,
I bend. Now, I may step onto the large field of
green and orange tatamis, arranged in an amply
elongated rectangle. An open field for our training,

a sublimated battlefield for the craft and
philosophy of fighting, evolved as an art of Love
from the fury of the Middle Ages’ killing—blades
hitting armor, swords sneaking into joints to
open up the flesh, the blood flowing and tainting
the soil.
Bowing. Bowing to space. Inscribing into
the body its preeminence, through a gesture of
dedication transmitted for ages from God knows
when. To endow, physically, experientially, a
portion of space with a singular potency. I
remember feeling impressed by the responsibility
of paying this tribute.
In no other circumstances in my life back then
would I be instructed to acknowledge that which
brings neither fun nor profit or progress. In no
other circumstances would I be led to attend
to a meaning that escapes functionality or
pleasure. With a plain, stoic matter-of-factness, I
was inscribing myself again and again into space,
thereby addressing it as an active presence that
matters, worthy of deference. It felt weird, it felt
right. It felt exciting. Honoring too. Time and
again astonishing. It felt like opening up to the
more than myself. It felt like dancing.


field within a field
The notion of field readily evokes an open array for the possible to emerge and unfold,
a fecund territory for the imaginable. But what lies behind this common metaphor?
What are its implications? Taken as a stretch of land cultivated for food, field brings
about sensuous associations of smells, turned-over soil, and exposure to weather. But
it sits also as a figure of major cultural importance as it reminds us that our entire
sedentary civilization rests on it. Besides, if it is a place for crops to grow, it is also, in
battle, one for corpses to fall. The site that welcomes the prosperous development of
things does equally host their perishing.
A step into an open-ended inquiry on these questions, this folio is conceived in the
wake of a performance research on space and places—on how we inhabit them and
how we are inhabited by them in turn. With the practice of “inviting space to invite
oneself” at its heart, we are exploring what it is to inhabit our lived experience, to
inhabit the places where we conduct our dedicated craft as artists and, finally, to inhabit
the environments we belong to.
This interrogation is pursued here on expanses of white paper through the figure of
the field—a way to think and feel our entanglement with space, as dancers, as people,
as beings. Composed of three movements—one that celebrates dance’s fecundity, a
second that faces the barren as an access to art’s potent impotency, and the last that
pays homage to a seminal experience for the author’s love for dance—this publication
offers itself as a constellation of echoes, frictions, and juxtapositions: a field of relation.

Somatic
Costumes
A Teaching Resource and
Performance Generator
by Sally E. Dean
In 2011, I began exploring the
potential of costumes as a bridge
to translate somatic practices into
performance. A key moment of the
project’s creation occurred while I
was living in Java, Indonesia (2007–
2008), and dressed in the traditional
dance costume, the kain, which is a
long cloth tightly wrapped around
the legs and pelvis and secured by a
stagen, a sash, also tightly wrapped—
this time around the waist, between
the pelvis and the ribs. This costume
restricted the movement of my legs,
kinesthetically “containing” my mid-
to lower body. I’d witnessed this
quality of containment in the daily
life movements and dances of the
Solonese in Java, but I wasn’t able to
embody it myself until I tried on the
costume. The costume’s sensorial
experience—rather than its aesthetic,
symbol, or meaning—was a portal
into new perceptions for me, chang-
ing the felt-sense of my body. This
experience instigated the following
question:
How can costume stimulate new
movement vocabulary or qualities that
might be missing from a performer’s
repertoire?
What developed and continues
today is the Somatic Movement,
Costume, and Performance Project,
an ongoing collaboration with costume
designers Sandra Arroniz Lacunza
(Spain), Carolina Rieckhof (Peru), and
myself (US/UK), in which we design
Somatic Costumes™ to instigate kin-
esthetic awareness in participants/
performers.
For example, we designed the
Balloon Hat to elicit the experience of
the buoyancy and volume of the skull
and the Bin Bag Skirt to enhance
the lightness of the pelvis and its
orientation to the sky. These Somatic
Costumes have led to performances,
talks, workshops, films, and more:
2017’s collection of Somatic Costume
events—Portals of Perception—
included an artist residency at the
London Contemporary Dance School
and Dance Research Studios; a lecture
and experiential talk at the London
College of Fashion’s Design for Perfor-
mance and Well-Being Research Hubs
as well as at the Wellcome Collection,
through its Open Platform event; and
a performance at the Birmingham
Arts & Science Festival. The Somatic
Movement, Costume, and Performance
Project based in London builds on
my ongoing cross-cultural collabo-
rations; my somatic practices; and
my last twenty years as a performer,
choreographer, and teacher living

UK.
This project integrates four
somatic practices that I have studied:
Amerta Movement (Javanese
Suprapto Suryodarmo), Skinner
Releasing Technique (American
Joan Skinner), Environmental
Movement (British Helen Poynor),
and Scaravelli Yoga (British Giovanni
Felicioni). Each somatic practice
instigates psychophysical awareness
through different focuses: Amerta
Movement combines imagery, environ-
ment, and ritualistic sites from Java;
Skinner Releasing Technique uses
poetic imagery; Environmental
Movement accesses the outdoor envi-
ronment of south-coast England; and
Scaravelli Yoga integrates external
body forms with internal sensation
and imagery.
Over the years, the Somatic
Costumes have developed in two
ways: as a somatic teaching and as a
performance practice. As a somatic
teaching resource, I offer workshops
to dancers, theatre practitioners, and
costume designers, in both university
and professional contexts, to open up
the under-explored relationship between
body and costume. As a performance
practice, the Somatic Costumes become
the starting point for my process and
material. Performance pieces emerge
from an improvisational relationship
with costume, in which costume is
a co-collaborator in the experience.
Instead of starting with an idea or a
concept, improvising with the costume
itself—listening and following its own
integral being—leads to an unfolding
of style, character, and movement
quality, as well as images and themes.
Somatic Costumes become the teachers

and the choreographers in this project.
The value and resource of costume in
both somatics and dance are not just in
its visual aesthetic but in what it does
to the body while wearing it—its tactile,
kinesthetic sense.
Costumes are portals of potential
and perception. What we wear affects
how we move, think, and feel, as well
as what we create and perform. If I
wear stiletto-heeled shoes, I walk in
an entirely different way than if I wear
heavy combat boots—the experience
of my feet and how I walk will change,
including the character and who I am
perceived to be, both on the inside and
on the outside. If I change what I wear,
I have the power to change what I feel
and think. A perspective can shift simply
by putting on a different hat. How
might a costume not only instigate
personal awareness but also create
social change through choreographic
practice? I offer people “somatic
acts”—performative invitations into
the somatic experience of what they
wear—as experiential exercises.
Somatic Act 1
Wherever you are, take a moment to
close your eyes. Sense your contact
to the floor, or a chair. Notice your
breath—your breathing. Taking a few
moments simply to inhale through the
nose and exhale through the mouth.
Notice that your costume is touching
you, and you are touching your costume.
Allow time.

Choose a coat to wear—one that
you haven’t worn for a long time
or have never worn before. With
eyes closed, slowly touch it.
What is it like?
Is the texture soft, smooth,
coarse, slippery, stiff? Now smell
it. Pause. Does it make sound?
Take time to explore it, following
your sensations. Pause.
Now slowly dress yourself.
Allow the coat to dress you. How
does it rest on your body? How
does it touch you? Is there a
sense of weight, compression,
or lightness? Slowly open your
eyes and continue with Somatic
Act 3.
Somatic Act 3
Close your eyes again and slowly,
following your sense of touch
and sensations, take off your
coat. Sense the transition as the
space between the touch of the
coat and your body increases.
When the coat is no longer
touching your body, notice what
you experience. Can you sense
an “invisible costume”? Slowly
open your eyes.
What did you experience?

Somatic Act 5
Find two big baking potatoes
or two smooth stones about
the size of your heart or fist.
Place either one stone or one
potato over your heart, as you
lie on your back on the floor
in a comfortable place and
position. Close your eyes. Notice
your breath, the inhale and the
exhale. Notice that the stone/
potato is touching you and you
are touching the stone. Rest
for 5–10 minutes. What did you
notice? What sensations arise in
the chest area?

Act 6
Find masking tape, a black
marker pen, and a partner,
and return to your two baking
potatoes or stones. Write on the
potatoes something you would
like more of in your life and
something you would like less
of. Ask your partner to tape the
stones or the potatoes over your
heart on the front and back of
your body. Be “dressed” with
eyes closed. Take your time—
notice the transition.
Then, once dressed, slowly
open your eyes and take a very
slow walk around your home in
silence. What do you notice?

Act 7
Take off the costume of your
stones or potatoes with the help
of your partner—slowly, with
eyes closed.
Once the costume is removed,
slowly open your eyes. Go for
another walk.
What did you notice? How is
your breath? Can you sense the
impact of the costume on your
chest? How do you feel?


Can you sense your costume rise and
fall with the breath? Can you sense
weight, texture, constriction? What
do you notice? Allow time.
Place your hand on your belly. Allow
the breath to deepen there. How is your
costume touching your belly or your
belly touching your costume? Is there
elastic around the waist, or a tightly
held button? How does this affect your
breathing? Rest for a moment…
Costumes as a Somatic Teaching
Resource
What are you wearing today?
Tight leggings, a baseball cap, a
loose-fitting dress? Have you ever
thought that what you are wearing
could change you—not just in the way
you look to the outside world but also
in how you feel, think, move, dance,
and perform?
When teaching, I often share this
exercise with participants: Pick or
create a movement combination (it
can be very simple, based on specific
everyday movement, external shapes/
forms, or internal qualities/images
you embody). Do it three times, but
change what you wear each time.
Try wearing a winter coat, high heels, a
dress. For example, when wearing the
stagen, participants begin to notice
that balancing, such as tipping off
the vertical, becomes easier. Or that a
long skirt with a lot of material, which
creates momentum, allows one to
spin faster.
Costumes become part of our
bodies in our everyday life and in our
dancing—a second skin. Not only
do they become part of us—they pro-
foundly impact how we dance/move.
While witnessing a dancer/mover,
I look for what is known or more
unknown in her or his movements.
This might be body areas, qualities,
images, characters, and so on. For
example, a participant might not be
aware of the movement potential of
her or his fingers when she or he moves.
To support this person, I would offer
wearing Feather-Fingers to facilitate
or initiate finger movement. Or if
the weight of the pelvis or tailbone is
missing in the participant’s aware-
ness, I might offer the Hula Hoop
Pelvis Skirt or the Furry, Water Bottle
Tailbone Belt. I also find that partici-
pants tend to have habits that they
are unaware of—for example, moving
their arms with a sudden light quality
above their head. Dressing participants

in costumes that awaken this habit
offers them other choices. I notice
that in somatics, choreography,
and improvisation, we often involve
human touch to bring awareness to
people’s bodies, but the costume’s
touch is underutilized. The costume
can help us enter into the nonverbal
and move beyond the visual realms—
through the tactile.
Somatic Costumes as Performance
Generators
The costume has a life of its
own. To sense this, I often begin by
touching the costume with my eyes
closed in order to experience the
qualities embedded in the material.
During improvisations with Somatic
Costumes, I have noticed a tendency
for participants to “follow” certain
aspects of the costume. They might
follow a sensation, image, or charac-
ter (there are infinite possibilities).
Where and how they place their

attention in what they follow creates
the aesthetic of the work. For example,
if I put two people in the Bin Bag
costume, one person might follow the
rustling sound of the costume and
the other might explore an expanded
body volume. What a participant
follows creates the relationship
between their body/movement and
the costume/material along with the
choreographic material generated.
Following is one method of respond-
ing to an aspect of the costume that
I have developed into a performance
practice. I specifically use the word
“following”—a starting place of listening
and receiving—so that the participant
does not relate to the costume as an
object to manipulate but rather as a
co-collaborator in the dance. The
costume moves you.
Epilogue
As I write, I am wearing my
Somatic Costume of Lentil Socks,
socks filled with dry lentils. I do this
because I know it affects how and
what I write. It’s a conscious choice—
what Alva Noë calls an “action of
perception”—along with how I sit on
the chair, the particular chair I sit on,
and where the chair is located. I am
in relationship.
I am choosing these Lentil Socks
today because once I am at my computer,
this relationship affects my eyes. My
eyes reach toward the computer screen
and I lose my peripheral focus (or
non-cortical gaze—a way of looking
that is not about naming, according
to somatics theorist Hubert Godard).
Instead, I accentuate my cortical focus
and heighten my concentration in the
direction of producing words, losing
the layers in between. I am writing
and seeing at a particular distance
just to the edge of the computer screen.
Kinesthetically, my fingers type,
creating a particular rhythm and
movement. This frames and creates
how I move and what I write.

I would like more choice. The
socks, filled with lentils, respond to
the tiniest of movements; like sand,
they shift when I shift. A slight move-
ment of a toe, and the lentils respond,
adapting to mold around my feet in
their new position. The movement of
the lentils awakens my feet, creating
a quality of “massage” with their small,
hard, smooth texture. The lentils also
create weight in my feet, orientating
them to their relationship with the
floor.
Choosing what I wear is a practice
of embodiment and a return to the
relationship between the costume and
my experience of the body. Metaphor-
ically and literally, we move each other.
This multisensorial, intersubjective
act of wearing allows me to further
experience and understand myself
through body, costume, and the
environment in relationship. Wearing
becomes the bridge to knowing and
knowledge, a powerful and untapped
somatic tool in the field of teaching,
performance, and choreographic
process.


Relations was a series of performances that took place
November 2–3, 2018, as part of the MCA Stage season at
the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago. Curated and
organized by MCA’s Associate Curator of Performance
Tara Aisha Willis, the event brought together Bebe Miller,
Ishmael Houston-Jones, and Ralph Lemon for the first
time as a trio in two improvised performances in the
Edlis Neeson Theater.
The following text originally appeared in a booklet
published on the occasion of Relations, which also included
writing by Claudia La Rocco, titled “BebeIshRalph.”
Sections of the text have been edited and excerpted
for this article.
The full booklet is available online as a PDF at
https://mcachicago.org/Calendar/2018/11/Ishmael-
Houston-Jones-Ralph-Lemon-Bebe-Miller-Relations.
—CQ eds
Part family reunion and part-first time encounter, they
[Ishmael Houston-Jones, Ralph Lemon, and Bebe Miller]
pay homage to their past selves, gesture to the futures of
dance that they have inspired, and testify to their present-
tense artistry. These longtime peers, friends, and icons have
not shared a stage since the early 1980s, when Houston-Jones
organized a series of solo and duet performances highlighting
the then under-discussed intersection of black choreographers
making “non-mainstream dance.” After nearly 40 years of
influencing each other from afar throughout their prolific
careers, the kinship between Houston-Jones, Lemon, and
Miller unfolds in real time on the MCA Stage in two bare-bones
improvisations that bring together each artist’s living,
embodied archives and their individual relationships to
performing and making dance.
[from the press materials]
Introduction
Tara Aisha Willis
Relations grew from a brief conversation with Ishmael
Houston-Jones (b. 1951), both of us exhausted and
downing coffee while I described what I felt was my then
new curatorial responsibility: crafting how the Museum
of Contemporary Art Chicago’s Stage season influences
the performance “canon,” while staying true to my belief
in finding unexpected ways to declare our relationship to
what precedes us. I asked Ishmael how he felt about being
asked frequently to perform his early works or speak
about experimental and improvised dance in downtown
New York in the late 1970s through the 1990s. Was it because
he is one of the few black dance artists from that scene
and we are in a moment when history and the present are,
rightfully, being examined for unconsidered perspectives?
I told him that I see him as a forebearer of my practices
as a dancer and curator, among artists including Blondell
Cummings (1944–2015), Fred Holland (1951–2016), Bill
T. Jones (b. 1952), Ralph Lemon (b. 1952), Bebe Miller
(b. 1950), and Jawole Willa Jo Zollar (b. 1950). Ishmael’s
response, like his improvisational performance style,
was indirect yet practical: “You know, I’ve never actually
performed with Ralph and Bebe. I’d love to do that.” For
Bebe, Ishmael, and Ralph, though the historical and
cultural contexts around their work over the last forty
years require attention, even intervention, more crucial
is the present. So, what if the answers to my questions
aren’t in a history lesson but a performance? What if the
only way to understand the past is by looking at the artists’
bodies at work today? Improvisation is a strategy for
performing and making dances at which these three are
experts, and improvisation has been integral to their work
from the beginning. Improvisation can be trusted to bring
out who they are and what they do—their tics and habits,
their past work balanced on each flick of an arm with the
immediacy of responding to the moment. Though they have
never danced as a trio before, since that first conversation
with Ishmael we have all imagined Relations as a reunion.

With shared history always just under the surface, their
inventing a dance together in front of an audience is
completely new yet completely familiar territory.…
We could mythologize them: Ishmael the punk, for
whom labels like “black,” “queer,” or “experimental dance”
aren’t limits so much as malleable tools; Bebe the linguist,
overlaying multiple articulations of her relationship
to dance, culture, and society, and trusting what that
intricacy unearths; Ralph the double agent, posing big,
poetic questions while adroitly dodging answers in favor
of something less nameable. But the possibilities within
these improvised performances on the MCA’s stage hinge
on the intimacy, often at a distance, of their relationships
with each other, not on those imagined figures.
Among only a few choreographers of their generation
and ilk who continue to make work, their relationship
seems as much about mutual artistic influence as it is
about friendship. I have looked to each of them as guide-
posts for what dance can be, what choices black artists
can make. We are not starting from scratch in the
current dance landscape when we ask big questions by
experimenting with dance, in part because these three
have already been in conversation for a long time, along
with many others. As Ishmael, Ralph, and Bebe navigate
their craft together, Relations continues that conversation.
EXCERPTS FROM CURATOR’S STATEMENT
FOR PLATFORM 2012: PARALLELS,
DANSPACE PROJECT, NEW YORK1
Ishmael Houston-Jones
“I chose the name Parallels for the series because while all
the choreographers participating are Black and in some
ways relate to the rich tradition of Afro-American dance,
each has chosen a form outside of that tradition and even
outside the tradition of mainstream modern dance.… This
new generation of Black artists—who exist in the parallel
worlds of Black America and of new dance—is producing
work that is richly diverse.” [from the program notes for
the original 1982 Parallels events]
So it was in 1982 when I was newly arrived in New York
from Philadelphia where I’d performed with Group Motion
Media Theater (a company led by two former members
of the Mary Wigman ensemble in Berlin) and studied
improvisation with Terry Fox, African at the Arthur Hall
Afro-American Dance Ensemble, modern (Horton) with

Joan Kerr as well as contact improvisation and one
semester of ballet. I asked Cynthia Hedstrom, the director
of Danspace Project at St. Mark’s Church in-the-Bowery,
if I could curate a series composed of a group of “Black”
choreographers who were working outside the mainstream
of modern dance. All those definitions seemed so simple
to me then. To me “Blacks” were the descendants of West
Africans who were brought to the Americas as slaves in
the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. They may or may not
have voluntarily intermarried with Native Americans or
less voluntarily interbred with the majority population.
They were all “freed” by the end of the 19th century but
suffered discrimination in the form of Jim Crow laws and
the inability to vote or to use the same public facilities or
acquire equal education as the majority population. They
could not marry whomever they wanted, and they suffered
real violence and death in the struggle to correct these
inequities. They also invented Spirituals, Gospel, Blues,
Jazz, and Rap. That’s who “Black” folk were to me then. I
did not consider folks from other parts of the Diaspora:
not the Caribbean and no, not Africa.
What was “beyond the mainstream” was somewhat
trickier to define. The Judson Dance Theater (1962–64) is
usually cited as the watershed moment in dance history
when traditional concert modern dance gave way to a
period of more experimental post-modern dance, with
Merce Cunningham seen as the intermediary figure.
However, most often in the history of the Judson era
the contributions of Black experimentalists are either
invisible or relegated to a footnote of the more “serious”
post-modern choreographers.…
In Merrill Brockway’s 1980 Dance in America PBS special
Beyond the Mainstream, the only non-white person who
appears in the hour is Kei Takei. Were there no African
Americans working beyond Brockway’s mainstream?
Ditto for Michael Blackwood’s 1981 documentary, Making
Dances, featuring the work of Trisha Brown, Meredith Monk,
Lucinda Childs, David Gordon, et al. (Blondell Cummings
is seen performing in a clip of Monk’s Education of the
Girlchild [italics added for emphasis].) This same cast of
choreographers, with a few variations, shows up in Sally
Banes’s 1982 book Terpsichore in Sneakers. Apparently,

in a dance movement that began in the impassioned
defiant days of the 1960s and proclaimed from the stage
and in manifestos that dance was a democratic form for
everyone, “everyone” was a rather limited concept.…
It’s been thirty years since Blondell Cummings, Fred
Holland, Rrata Christine Jones, Ralph Lemon, Bebe
Miller, the late Harry Sheppard, Gus Solomons Jr., and I
performed on the first Parallels series at Danspace Project
[in 1982]. It’s been twenty-five since Jawole Willa Jo Zollar
joined us on the Parallels in Black tour to Paris, Geneva,
and London. Now Bebe, Gus, Jawole, along with David
Rousseve, Cynthia Oliver, myself, and others, are on the
faculties of major university dance departments. In the
first Parallels series, I was making the case that to be a
contemporary Black dance maker, one did not have to
be a direct descendant of Ailey. We were coming from
Cunningham, Nina Weiner, Monk, Contact Improvisation,
as well as African and American Black Dance traditions.
Now many of those traditions are part of the modern
dance canon; dance students have been exposed to those
forms and to us as teachers.…
As the African American choreographers of my generation
have continued using their progressive ideas to make new
works and to disrupt the canon, whom can we identify as
the next generation who will wreak havoc on the status quo?
ISHMAEL
Ralph Lemon
Shaman. A person regarded as having access to, and
influence in, the world of good and evil spirits. Typically
such people enter a trance state during a ritual, and
practice divination and healing.
He shows us his ass, he shows us his dick, his fat, his
skinny, he shows his fear, his rage, he shows us his
wisdom…
He’s never read Ralph Ellison’s Invisible Man; at least he
hadn’t by 2011.
1982. St. Mark’s Church, Danspace Project. I meet Ishmael
Houston-Jones. What a name, Ishmael, like from Moby Dick,
Melville, I think to myself. He calls my dance, Wanda in the
Awkward Age, from 1981, “a black dance,” and I tell him
that that is absurd. He says that it is OK that I disagree
and asks me to be part of an event he is curating at
St. Mark’s Danspace, called Parallels. A grouping of an
(imagined) black downtown dance community, seven of
us. He was feeling lonely, he said. Sure, why not, I said.

and Jawole Willa Jo Zollar are all here. I’m captivated
watching the whole show from offstage, everybody’s very
different dancing points of view. Offstage (every night)
Ishmael seems to be yawning, or not watching at all. I
can’t take my eyes off his dancing. He scares me a little.
I don’t understand why he dances the way he dances, like
he’s mad at somebody, with an odd kind of grace.
1987. Rimini (the place where Fellini was born). Fred
Holland, Ishmael, and I are performing. (I have brought
along my twelve-year-old daughter, Chelsea, who has
completely fallen in love with Fred, of course.) Ishmael
danced tonight in only his underwear and worn-out black
combat boots, bodysurfing over the empty chairs of the
small audience in this tidy outdoor plaza, in this quaint
Italian port town. I think he frightened the few who were
there. I thought he was crazy.
1989. I watch Ishmael dance with his mother on TV,
PBS, Alive from Off Center, and for a moment I want to
be Ishmael, I want to dance with my mom. “Dance your
little heart out Chucky,” his moms says! Fuck him, I say
to myself, with abandoned envy.
1995. Performance Space 122. Tonight I watched Ishmael
catch flying spit, Keith Hennessy’s spit, gobs of it, right in
the center of his mouth, again and again. Like he was in
love, making love. I haven’t seen anything as artfully
violent on stage since then.

 Just saw the reconstruction of THEM at PS122. I
missed the original version in 1985, probably because
I was at a Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane show, or maybe Molissa
Fenley, or maybe a Charlie Moulton extravaganza, the
superstars at the time. Damn, it was disturbing, vital,
poignant, raw, and still timely. In 1985 I was going to
ballet class every day. Enough said.
2011. At Judson Memorial Church, Yvonne Meier (Ishmael’s
ex of many years back) asked Ishmael to strip naked and
roll around in a pile of dirt and he did. And then he put on
a skirt made of bags of walnuts and she told him to jump
up and down. And he did, for a long time. Which freaked
the dancer-choreographer David Thomson out, me too.
I think David was even crying.
2012. A letter to a young artist.
…My humble advice, because I am older and you are
younger, don’t be so self-conscious, vain. What’s up with
this generation and its narcissism? It’s what’s inside, but you
already know this. It’s also about getting so deep in the work
that your body disappears. It’s about the work, brother, not
the fucking beauty. Making work where you are too confident
in how good, smart, contemporary, transgressive the work
looks—seems—is a mistake.
When you start to become too self-conscious, just think of
Ishmael, he was inside a fucking garbage bag (unseen) for an
hour and it was the best moment of the ten-hour marathon
at St. Mark’s Danspace (the Parallels redux) in 2012, let’s
not forget.
Can You See How I See?
Bebe Miller
Humans are built on memory. We build our place in
the world through how and what we remember. We move
through the events we encounter according to our habits
and perceptions, ricocheting and navigating through the
familiar and unfamiliar by way of constant sensory infor-
mation. We organize faces, postures, our relation to the
weather and the political climate, aligning ourselves to
the interior catalogue of events that we collate and
regenerate through the course of our lives.
Dances—and dancers—are built by humans. The layers
of remembered events we pass through daily become the
fascial matrix of the form of the body, the form of an idea,
form itself. We remember remembering, and find ourselves
yet again at a point of becoming. Memory is the container;
remembering is the action. For me, choreographing seems
to be a way of revisiting small events in some weird,
made-up way. I’m less interested in coming up with a
different ending or turn of circumstance than in the
chance to recrystallize a fleeting encounter. I stop time
long enough to read it from the inside, from the flesh, from
a distance. I fact-check my attention, choreographically:
what’s the rhythm, where’s the focus, what’s the next
move, what can I interrupt.
Watching dancing goes along with making dances.
The first time I saw Ralph Lemon dance (in the early
1980s?) he was maneuvering a flat cardboard car in the
Cunningham studio in Westbeth, New York. I think he was
wearing glasses. I also wore glasses, but it hadn’t occurred
to me to dance with them on in front of people. He put one
kind of motion next to another (also) in ways that hadn’t
occurred to me. I felt a certain relief that he (also) did not
seem to be translating a perspective assumed to be for
black people. I enjoyed not knowing why he was doing
what he was doing. I received it, didn’t try to explain it,
and kept an eye out for what else he might do. When I first
saw Ishmael dance (also in the early 1980s) he was wearing
an animal; perhaps he was also wearing his combat boots—
I can’t quite recall. He had worked up an intensely personal
and pungent state that was mesmerizing. He moved wildly
and carefully, and there was a hint of Twyla Tharp along-
side the bushwhack—pretty terrific. I hadn’t seen anyone
become that transported since dancing during Yoruba
bembé ceremonies in Queens in the 1960s.
My reason for dancing is because of what it feels like.
I place one arm in time and space, check it against an
awareness forming in another part of my body, note what
I attend to, and proceed to bend, redirect, interrupt the
references that rise up. I rearrange sensation, image,
according to the form that emerges. I follow the timing
between gestures, the tell, the rise of attention between
people, the toss of their weight, the offhand smirk of a
shoulder held in place a bit too long. Dancing holds
many moments I’ve walked through before, but it’s their
rearrangement rather than the retelling that most interests
me. What I remember, what I carry with me, is what I
measure the present moment against.
Earlier in my career, when I began to realize that
people were paying attention to these dances we were
making and coming back more than once to see what I
was up to (even though I wasn’t sure what I was up to),
I was regularly asked about what perspective on the
African diaspora I was sharing. Clearly my telling
needed some translating. How to answer that?



Elaine Summers (1925–2014) was a
choreographer and founding member
of the Judson Dance Theater. Her perfor-
mance work was presented at the Museum
of Modern Art and the Guggenheim
Museum, at the Lincoln Center Out of
Doors festival, and throughout the world.
She was founding director of several
organizations, including the Elaine
Summers Dance & Film Company, the
Experimental Intermedia Foundation,
and the Kinetic Awareness Center.
In the 1970s, she began developing
and teaching Kinetic Awareness® (KA), an
approach to somatic education with broad
applications for both performing artists
and the general public. KA includes a
variety of awareness-based techniques,
such as placing rubber balls under various
parts of the body to provide contact with
inner sensations. Practitioners of KA exper-
ience enhanced awareness of inefficient
movement patterns and psycho-physical
patterning, creating space for healing,
change, and choice. KA was the basis
of training for dancers in Summers’s
exuberant intermedia projects.
I imagine that each person who
worked closely with Elaine Summers
has their own version of her. In my
memories of Elaine, she is a guide
leading her students toward inner
realms, where, like archaeologists
on a dig, we explore in fine detail the
mysteries of our bodies. In her role as
guide, she is free of all agendas save
a generous, listening presence. She
exudes a deep respect for our unique-
ness as individuals, sitting beside
and supporting us as we delve into
the aliveness of our moving bodies.
Through her words and quality of
presence, she guides us in a practice
of noticing: our emotions, memories,
and the evolution of ideas within
our flesh.
As I write about Elaine, I become
entangled with my former self. Though
I worked with her intimately from
1978 to 1983 and beyond, I did not
know Elaine like she knew me. In our
time together, the relationship was
always about me. I trusted her com-
pletely, and because of this, I learned
to trust the truth of my body, senses,
and movement.
When I began working with
Elaine, I was hungry: a young,
searching artist yearning to create
original work. I was also in physical
and psychological pain. My knees
had been swelling regularly since
adolescence (I was “put on pointe”
since age 8), and I had suffered lower-
back and shoulder blade pain since
1974. Emotionally, I was struggling
with issues of self-worth tied to
personal, gender, and cultural history
as a Puerto Rican woman, and I was
on a quest to decolonize my body/
mind/psyche from assumptions and
patterns (subconscious/habitual)
of thinking, being, and moving that
blocked inner knowledge. Elaine’s
process of Kinetic Awareness per-
fectly matched my needs. It melded
systematic study and training of the
body with artistic praxis, teaching
me how to develop my artistry while

simultaneously healing physical and
psychological wounds. While working
with her, my repertoire of movement
expanded exponentially as I investi-
gated embodied phenomena such as
“body image,” “frozen tension”—two
of several names Elaine used to refer
to particular psycho-physical states—
and inefficient movement patterns
arising from various emotional states.
Kinetic Awareness and improvisation
became central practices in my quest
to develop movement forms that
would express my reality as a Puerto
Rican woman.
Elaine’s approach empowered
me as an artist because it allowed
me to integrate healing into my
creative practice. Kinetic Awareness
initiated me into breathwork and
somatic awareness practices that
became entry points to the energetic
dimensions of my body. This was my
introduction into mindful movement
as a basis for cultivating the whole
self, including personal, anatomical,
physiological, psychological, chemical,
electrical, and spiritual dimensions.
Kinetic Awareness and improvisation
became tools for accessing my body
as teacher and healer and for harness-
ing the wild complexity of mindful
embodiment within a life in dance.
I first met Elaine in 1978 as a
CETA1 dancer with the Cultural Council
Foundation. I had been assigned to dance
with her in a series of performances of
her work Illuminated Workingman (1974),
which took place in NYC parks. There
were several other CETA dancers, and
I remember the performing experience
was unlike any I had had until then.
While Elaine was wildly enthusiastic,
her process was chaotic. She would
change unison movement for a large
group section moments before the
show, leaving dancers confused and
unable to achieve the intended unison.
But it was enormously fun. One of her
dancers, Tedrián Chizik—a performer

The studio is a large open space, with white walls and no
windows. There are containers with balls and large blocks of foam
covered with faux fur blankets. Grab a blanket from a pile, and one or
more balls, find a spot on the floor and lie down. Close your eyes and
breathe, sensing into the body changes as you drop your weight onto
a ball, letting go. Scanning through your body, each breath brings
more and more sensations into awareness. Sensing your weight
contouring around the balls, how much of your whole self can
you feel—the joints, bones, pulse, breath, muscles, skin? Play with
sounding the breath, allowing/sensing the vibration of the sound
and breath to reverberate through your tissues, sensing this particular
relationship of body parts in space, release into gravity. The chorus of
sounds and dancers moving ever so slowly on the ground supports
the process.
Elaine makes her way around the room addressing each
student: “What are you working on?” She gives you her complete
attention, making suggestions for how to work toward a particular
goal—find articulation in the lower back, release tension in the
shoulder, connect through the legs, etc. After 30 to 45 minutes of
working individually, we transition into working on “letting the body
stretch itself,” a practice of following minute impulses in and through
the body to move into extension. What does it mean to let go? To
follow the body’s impulses? We always start slowly, deliberately,
articulating and becoming aware of every body part’s engagement,

Dancing with Elaine (cont’d)
using as little tension as possible. Adding “extension tension” takes
us into release, which brings speed, momentum. We let the pulsing
energies and rhythms of extension and release move us through
levels, space, and working with each other. In between extending
and releasing, leading and following, we experience “being danced”
by forces of movement, sound, and weight. Surrendering to the
movement and the moment, the energy builds. The body and voice
are freed. I experience kinesthetic and aesthetic delight, surprise,
freedom, and connection. Healing.
Sometimes the experience is slow, dark, emotional. You close
your eyes and tune into your sadness, anger, pain, or fear of letting
go. Breathing and moving ever so slowly and attentively, I realize
that I am able to release a bit of this, one breath at a time, or through
the sounds I am making. Elaine encourages us to stay with whatever
comes up—emotional release and expression are an integral part
of the quest, mission, or commitment to creating dance art and
becoming fully human. We practice allowing emotions to move
through us; attentively aligning layers of experience (movement,
shape, emotion, sound), we engage in their artistic expression. It’s
OK to cry as long as you keep working. In this process of embracing
painful feelings, I discover that they no longer cripple me but, in fact,
help me grow, fuel the work. Healing.
In private sessions, we worked with light and color. In this
energetic/spiritual work, she would ask me to close my eyes and
sense my pulse or my breath, and then to describe the experience.
If I reported sensations of rhythm, color, and light, she instructed
me to breathe into the experience, give into it, and direct it to the
third eye or brain—an initiation into light work, expanding
possibilities. Healing.
u
and children’s theater director who
had studied and danced with Elaine
for many years—extolled the depth
and transformative power of her work,
which persuaded me to study with her
as a way to heal my aching body.
Elaine was, first and foremost,
an artist. She applied her artistic
philosophy, burnished in 1960s experi-
mentalism, to investigations of the
body and movement. Prior to my
working with her, she had been active
in generating democratizing ideas and
forms as a member of the Judson Dance
Theater.2 She was a strong advocate for
what she called the “rainbow range” of
movement possibilities and aesthetics.
The ethos of her kinesthetic investi-
gations echoed Judson peer Yvonne
Rainer’s manifesto that “no one thing
is any more important than any other.”3
Elaine privileged no single way of
moving over another, nor did she
consider any body part to be more
important than another. This commit-
ment to a democratic view of the body
led her to explore diverse approaches to
presenting bodies both through live
performance and on film. Beginning
in the 1960s, she worked freely across
media, and in 1968 she founded the
Experimental Intermedia Foundation,
which is still active today.
In her Kinetic Awareness and
dance improvisation classes in the
late ’70s and ’80s, Elaine regularly
posed the question, “How does your
body (head, hip, shoulder) want to
move?” For me, a dancer trained
in old-style pedagogies of classical
dance requiring students to move in
ways designed by others, Elaine’s

question presented a revolutionary
proposal that both baffled and
delighted me while opening up new
possibilities for creative experimenta-
tion. I experienced it as an invitation
for me to enter the singular kinetic
consciousness of my unique body.
Elaine encouraged us to observe,
without judgment, the experience
of our bodies moving of their own
volition. We understood that in Kinetic
Awareness, the mind’s job was to
direct the body to move and observe
its corporeal unfolding. This practice,
like phenomenological and Buddhist
practices I would encounter later
in my career, demanded sustained
attention to present space/time,
supported by the suspension of
preconceptions and judgments.
How Does This Body Want to
Move?
In 2016, I initiated the project
How Does This Body Want to Move?
—a multimodal performance and
research initiative that served as a
reflection on Elaine’s legacy and
influence on me. This intensive project
entailed a year of performances,
master classes, and public conver-
sations relating to Elaine’s oeuvre,
which culminated in the performance
of Elaine in the air and me, a program
of works choreographed by myself,
Patti Bradshaw, Marion Ramírez, and
Noemí Segarra, presented at the 92nd
Street Y in NYC. While conducting
movement research for this project,
I discovered that the act of dancing
brought Elaine vividly back to life
in my consciousness. As I danced in
rehearsals and performances, she
visited in flashes and fragments,
seeding new awareness of her
influence on my choreography and
teaching over the decades. I offer
select fragments here as a means of
representing the way her memory
reverberates in my dancing. The
following two sections contain
concepts, reflections, quotes, and
memories culled from movement
research, conversations with peers,
and notes I took while studying with
Elaine and working on How Does This
Body Want to Move?



In Elaine’s Words: Notes from
Kinetic Awareness Journals
1978–1983
Start as tiny as possible: discover
the subtlety of your body.
Center is the place where the body
returns when you are not doing
anything.
There is no place in this work for
criticism.
Understand your own body—learn
your problem areas, what’s strong,
what needs help—and confront
Aunt Matilda [the negative voices
from the past].
The body is an electrical field; energy
bubbles inside. We may perceive the
room or objects in the room vibrating,
48 CONTACT QUARTERLY SUMMER/FALL 2019
but somehow this is considered not
normal in average adults. We are
trained not to see, not to feel, and it is
frightening when we experience it.
Allow both the conscious and
unconscious to manifest themselves.
The function of the intellectual mind
is to observe.
One achieves control through
letting go.
Remembering Elaine Today
2018
One could say that Elaine’s dance
class was a workshop in phenomeno-
logical methodology. When exploring
a body part or way of moving, she
encouraged us to move as if we had
never moved that part of the body
before. As we explored our individ-
ual experiences, we reinforced each
other’s practices, will, and creativity
through our own example. Patti
Bradshaw remembers: “We became so
much our own movers that we would
joke that she had ruined us to be able
to dance with anyone else. One day
you found out that you knew how to
dance in your own way, and you had
the skills to develop in whatever way
you liked.”
Marion Ramírez, who studied
with Elaine from 2003 to 2010, remem-
bers that Elaine taught us that we
were “experts of our own bodies.”
This aspect of the teachings was pro-
foundly significant to me given my
prior training in classical European
dance, and it was especially important
in my decolonization quest as a
Puerto Rican woman.
Elaine’s generosity and care for
her students knew no bounds. She

supported my artistic development
well beyond my participation in
her classes and performances. For
instance, while I was her student, she
once lent me her loft studio for an
early self-produced concert of work.
Over subsequent years, she attended
many of my concerts, including
several in the South Bronx, an area
that most Manhattan folks refused to
travel to in order to see work. I have
many memories of her at the end of
each show, limping down the aisle,
beaming a smile, and carrying flowers,
like a fairy godmother imparting her
blessing. I always wondered how she
got there.
Elaine’s approach to time was
radical. Marion recalls that in her
classes, there was “no need to get
anywhere or achieve anything, nor
to fulfill any expectations.” Working
slowly for extended periods of time,
you become aware of the flexible
nature of time. Moving in infinite
slowness was the key to tuning in
to the subtlest details, taking you to
a place where, as Patti recalls, you
“start to identify one muscle fiber, one
cell moving, at a time.”
Many of the concepts and prac-
tices Elaine taught remained beyond
my reach while I worked with her.
Nonetheless, Kinetic Awareness
practices became foundational to
my artistic evolution. From 2005 to
2015, I engaged in a multisite project
called the Branch Dance series, which
was informed by intensive training
in slow effortless movement and by
performing in Elaine’s seminal works
in projected environments. Modal
Practice, the creative methodology I
have developed since 1985, engages a
dance of the energetic body conjured
through various principles around
listening to the body that I trace back
to Elaine, such as moving slowly;
letting the body stretch itself; scan-
ning through the body; and aligning
breath, sound, and movement.
Helping people feel good made
Elaine feel good. She wanted to see
us find freedom in our bodies, see
healthy bodies become healthier,
see twisted toes find length. Elaine
wanted to see people moving out of
pain and into pleasure.
In Gratitude
Elaine Summers was a pioneering
artist who had a profound impact
on the contemporary dance world
and on thinking about the capacities
of the human body in motion. As I
remember her here, I pay tribute to
her legacy, and I express gratitude
with the hope that this brings greater
awareness to her life and work.
u
NOTES
1CETA refers to the Comprehensive
Employment and Training Act, which
was a government program modeled on
Roosevelt’s Works Progress Administra-
tion. In New York City, federal monies to
employ artists were funneled through
different organizations. I was hired by
the Cultural Council Foundation for
three years with an annual salary of
$10,000. The job requirements changed
over that time. The first year, my 35-hour
work week consisted of 7 hours of com-
munity service, and the rest of the time
was designated for work on my choreog-
raphy. By the final year, the community
service requirement had increased to
about 21 hours per week. CETA was like
a fellowship, providing a wonderful basis
of support for a budding artist.

Why is CI important for queer activism? What can
queerness contribute to CI practice?
CI practice and queer practices can be seen as allies
that support each other, but this alliance can’t exist without
mutual disruption. For us, the term “queer” points to any
kind of non-heteronormative and anti-patriarchal behavior,
feeling, or sensation. Regarding CI, queerness expresses
a sensation or feeling of discomfort and the ability to see
patriarchal heteronormativity functioning in CI spaces.
One may ask: Since when is CI about sexuality? We
pose a need for sexual positivity as one of the possible
queer approaches and as a critique of the disregard of
feelings and the negation of sexual sensations within CI.
If mainstream CI spaces are being set as “pure” spaces
without reference to sexuality, they are, in fact, sex-negative,
causing taboos and abuse. We need an understanding of
sexual expression as something that is somatically basic
and inalienable, happening everywhere all the time, which
cannot be confined. This means changing our understanding
of sexuality altogether. (A deeper conceptual research on
this change of perspective about sexuality is not the aim
of this article, but it’s needed.)
In queer activism, we are very well trained in discursive
practices, like creating concepts and discussing them as a
group to build a set of values and acceptable and unaccep-
table practices. We believe our training in discourse could
be valuable for CI practice, bringing awareness to the social
and political challenges it faces, and also extending concep-
tual background for the bodily practice in CI. Conversely,
we believe the somatic perspective is underdeveloped
among the queer movement and a queer approach to
the body can advance within a CI framework.
QCI 2018: program, aims, what we did, disruptions,
remaining questions
In spring 2018, 25–35 people, mostly dancers, met in
Hamburg at two successive events: a symposium and a
dance festival called Queer Contact Improvisation. The
symposium was designed for experienced contacters
with an aim of artistic research and sharing what queer
CI might be and how the dance festival that followed
might be facilitated differently than mainstream ones.
The festival itself was conceived as a joyful dance gathering
open to inexperienced participants. The workshops
during the symposium and the festival had relevant and
stimulating themes, such as Filling the Gap; CI as a Tool
to Explore Non-monogamous Dynamics; Closeness and
Distance during Physical Contact; Sensual Objectification;
Feminist, Safer Space! What’s That About? Weaving
Dominance and Commitment; Dance with Courage;
Politics of Mutuality; Beyond Consent; Different Qualities
of Touch; and Queering Gaze and Space.
Two sensations dominate our general impression of
these events: vital energy and aliveness (as expected from
dance practice and embodied sharing) and the effort of
expressing and experiencing disagreement. In hindsight,
those disruptions appear to have constituted the queerness
of the gathering. Examples of “deliberate disruptions”
were disagreeing to being part of and possibly objectified
through the research; demanding a deep familiarity with
and commitment to feminist theory and activism from
all participants; limiting the expectation of inclusivity
through the facilitation of activities that excluded cis
men; acknowledging the need not to be sociable and nice
all the time; going topless as a somatic reaction to the heat
of the sun despite the possible sexualised interpretation of
this gesture; “artistic” intervention of “the nipple police,”
covering all visible nipples with tape; direct critique of
the suggested working formats; and choosing what not
to listen to. The “unintentional disruptions” included
expressing one’s own vulnerability and traumas in a
highly empathetic community, and directly expressing
one’s own unconscious propensities, such as reluctance
in the choice of a partner for an exercise. Other disrup-
tions were experienced as self-confrontations: choosing
which problematic issues to address publicly and which to
deal with privately (the question of responsibility for the
emotional labor), confronting one’s shame around being a
privileged cis man, or realizing oneself not to be as loving
and inclusive as one had believed oneself to be.
One participant wrote: “In the last jam, I was dancing,
laughing, and crying at the same time. I didn’t know
why, what happened.” What was the joy of our meeting?
When we read participants’ words from the last sharing
we realized that great joy was mainly described as a
private, bodily sensation: being empowered, comforted,
or grounded; taking up space. The joyful interpersonal

relations were described as “coming together,” “integration,”
“seeing the vulnerability of others,” and “showing yourself.”
These experiences were often directly followed by questions
about one’s place in the group—about inevitable self-respon-
sibility and limits of intersubjective communication. This
“distanced togetherness” seems to be remarkable in
comparison to the vague “us” that is often heard in
closing circles of mainstream festivals.
The difficulty of balancing consensus and disagreement
was one of the biggest surprises during the symposium,
leading to the question of whether the queer movement
is intrinsically inclusive or not.
Queer CI space: unfolding core values of CI
When creating a queer CI event, we face the question
of whether this is a CI space for queers or a queer perspec-
tive on CI. The second option is more interesting to us,
yet we think the first one must be encouraged to get into
the second one. In a dance space ruled by patriarchal
heteronormative norms, the interactions that can happen
are limited by its implicit rules, which dominate the space.
A queer perspective on CI is about freeing the space from
this kind of maybe unconscious, or at least unsaid, implicit
or inexplicit control. Although at the moment we are not
able to say exactly what the core of our queer dancing is,
it nonetheless seems to have a magnetic effect that brings
together practitioners from very different communities
and from outside the community of queer activists.
From a political perspective, there’s a common core of
queer values and CI values: horizontality, equality, breaking
the patterns, building up a different kind of interpersonal
space, proactivity, and so on. At the same time, CI seems
to be a mirror of society and may unintentionally and
subconsciously reproduce inequality, anachronistic patterns,
and social conventions through bodily interactions. In
this sense, an alliance of CI and queer approaches may
strengthen their shared core.
For now, we understand that the queer approach to CI
implies balance between bodily experience and discourse.
To be queer is one of the possible ways to feel and to say “I
am different.” This statement is the beginning of a discourse
on otherness that is rooted in the experience of one’s
own gendered body and bodily desire. This discourse is
grounded in the habit of naming the smallest private
sensations that may feel irrelevant but which add up to
one’s bodily sense of existence and underlie subjective
identity and orientation. A queer perspective makes this
explicit and necessary in order to gain social visibility
and legitimacy. When CI is practiced in a cis-heterosexual
environment, those kinds of sensations are easily skipped
because the heteropatriarchal norm tends to try to make
itself invisible. Subtle sexual expressions and sensations
like “I feel you inside me already when I step in your
peri-personal space” might not be well received in a hetero-
normative practice of CI. In contrast, “I feel your floor
through our common bodily structure” is a more neutral
way of describing an intimate encounter, washed of any
kind of voluptuous sensations or feelings and thus acceptable.

Making present what is cataloged as “intimate” or
“private,” “against the flow,” or “conflictive” in the CI
dance space can contribute to making visible the cis-
heteropatriarchal norm. Clearly, practice is the source
of knowledge. This process of queering CI is in its early
stages and needs practice to unfold its insights and dis-
course, advancing from queerness as identity politics to
queerness as a quality of somatic interaction.
Knowledge: the language of flesh
In the 20th century, somatic practices were system-
atized within a rational framework as body knowledge.
Those who systematized them—largely under the influ-
ence of Buddhism and New Age thinking—were gathering
knowledge from other parts of the globe because they
were questioning Western cultural standards of knowl-
edge and finding them inadequate for describing somatic
experience. There is also the discussion around exoticism
and whether somatics contains a certain amount of
“whitened orientalism” and cultural appropriation.
In any case, CI adds an artistic and a horizontal
communicational approach to somatics, which can be of
high interest for queer, feminist, anti-racist, anti-ableist,
animalist, and other political movements. Post-humanist
political movements, somatics being part of them, can
help shape a whole new approach to human life and our
future development on planet Earth.
All of these means are looking for a balance between
feeling free to be empathetic and feeling free to express
disagreement and, by doing so, are widening the possible
interactions in dance and queer spaces. This could lead to
peaceful experiences of conflict and diverse and playful
experiences of consensus. Political queer activism and CI
Consent: developing a queer political perspective on
CI from a critique of consent
One of the failed assumptions about these QCI events
was that sexually intense dances would take place. We
wonder if this absence of sexual intensity could be related
to the heightened awareness that queer activists have
about the practice of consent.
Of course, a queer space is not freed of the possibility
of sexual assault, but generally our understanding of con-
sent comes from the idea of how it developed for straight
spaces. A queer and somatic critique of consent could
change how we approach consent when we are not in a
heteronormative situation. The heteronormative idea of
consent comes from a backdrop of unequal power rela-
tions and verbally based frameworks. In CI, there is the
possibility of preverbal consensus beyond words.
There are inherent problems with an embodied (non-
verbal) perspective of consent: what is it to believe that
you are empathizing with another person versus actually
empathizing with the other person? When approaching
consent, there’s always some insecurity that threatens the
safe space as a whole. However, what we know within the
political queer movement is that at some point we have
to trust in order to be able to escape from this circularity,
to be able to let go of that feeling of generalized suspicion
that abuse could happen—that I cannot know another’s
feelings about my touch. Releasing from that feeling of
suspicion implies a commitment to the responsibility of
thinking, speaking, dancing, and practicing how to build
trust by disassembling relationships of domination and
submission between the participants. We think building
trust is something very, very queer. From a queer contact
improvisation perspective, this is an ambition the whole
CI community should pursue and practice.

Preliminary suggestions for facilitation of queer
CI events
What have we learned from QCI 2018 that we can take
forward into the facilitation of future queer dance events?
1. 2. 3. 4. Be open for the unexpected. Expect disagreement.
The outcome of both events turned out to differ
from facilitators’ plans. During the symposium, we
experienced reluctance toward objectifying research
and toward the effort of consistent documentation.
The festival also had disruptive vitality alongside
affirmation. This shows a need for new formulas of
dance meetings.
Create braver spaces, which can be shared by people
with different openness to challenges and where
physical, sensory, and emotional risks can be taken,
in addition to safer spaces, free from sexual and
social abuse or harassment.
Independent dance practice, research, facilitation,
and healing are different roles, which are difficult
to handle simultaneously by one or two persons.
Delegate them to a broader team and to the whole
community.
Use the venue to support your group process.
Besides the main place for gathering as a
community, you may need
• places for gathering in subgroups;
• a protected place for healing;
• a place for being alone;
• accessibility for everyone.
photo © Wiktor Skrzypczak
Participants of the QCI symposium during the workshop
Beyond Consent, with teacher Aramo Olaya; Hamburg,
Germany, May 2018.
5. Use the work session time according to participants’
bodily and mental resources:
• start each activity with movement;
• balance speaking, moving, and resting time;
• don’t wait until the evening for precious
improvisation time; people might be too tired.
6. Determine the balance between moving and talking
by the choice of prompts for the activity:
• text for discursive exchange and research;
• movement or performance for embodied
exchange and research.
7. Take your time with big questions; focus on
small ones.
8. 9. Reduce the external input from teachers.
Keep the leading question of the meeting specific
and sharp. It will get bigger and more complex
nevertheless.
10. Offer additional introduction, including gender-
neutral language and preferred pronouns.
11. If you are determined to use specific work formats
or documentation and research methods, inform the
participants about it beforehand in the description
of the event, and be consistent. People are surprisingly
thankful for reliable frameworks.
12. Have methods workshops. Sometimes how you do
the thing is more important than the thing itself.
Develop new, embodied methods.
13. Observe when the movement evokes meaning
and when the meaning moves. Blend verbal and
corporeal practices. Stay at the edge of implicit
and explicit communication. Work out new,
performative ways of knowing and relating;
write down your method; share it; and test it.