CQ 1

So this is Contact Newsletter Number 3. Oh boy, its really happening. Now that it's really happening,
it just may be time for a change. Two things I want to bring up - one being participation in the
Newsletter, and the other being format and intention of the Newsletter - both of which seem to
be evolving.
FIRST: participation. At this point, contributors have been those people who are initiating some contact
work. They send in their histories, or opinions, reports, announcements ... There are now people who are
working with contact in one situation or another that have some ideas, opinions, messages that they
would like to share but aren't actually (at this point) initiating any contact work on their own other than
doing it within an already existing structure. Question: how do we limit, or SHOULD we limit the
contributions. I am ready to open the Newsletter to whoever has something to say. The main reason
for keeping the contributors limited in the past is practical. The more news we get, the more hours I
have to spend typing and the m .... ore expensive it is to get the thing copied and sent out. I mentioned
in the last Newsletter that everyone should send a dollar with their contribution to handle copying and
postage, and also that . the letters be sent as soon after reading the Newsletter as possible. I got 3 dollars.
No hard feelings but if the Newsletter is gonna get bigger, then we all have to put in for it. Plus, the
letters dribbled in one by one over about 6 weeks and various phonecalls. At the moment, the money
to print and send the Newsletters is coming out of the Contact Fund. The Contact Fund is money
that is sent by those people who are making money from their contact work - 103 of NET earnings
(after expenses) is to be contributed. However, we haven't gotten much response in awhile. This is
all as it is but let's send our dollars with our letters so we can have a Newsletter if we want it. I'm gonna
send this issue to everyone who has participated so far in the last 3 issues to give everyone a chance to
decided for themselves if they want it to continue. So much for that.
NEXT: format and intention of the Newsletter. Up to now I've been either typing up people's letters
directly (if they're written to the Newsletter) or if they are written to me personally, I've been typing
up the newsy sections. It's all been pretty cut and dried; juicey is as juicey does. And like I said it's
been pretty much reporting on what's going on with a few opinions or comments. However, as the work
goes on there are more things to say directly about the work, its possibilities, methods of teaching it
that have worked well, essays on particular aspects of working with contact - some of this kind of stuff
is to be tasted in this issue. I would love to have the Newsletter become a kind of forum, switchboard
of ideas, thoughts, essays, written for and about contact, as well as a place to say hello and exchange
addresses. That again opens it up into a larger publication. Som_e people who are doing contact or are
just interested in it have asked me if they could get a 'subscription' to the Newsletter, having themselves
no news at present. I've held them off in the meanwhile till I put the idea out to everyone. I would be
willing to carry on the function of funneler of information at least until April or May when I'll be
on the lam for a few months.

Though I was gone for four months this past summer it has not taken long for me to become
immersed once again in movement activities here in the Bay Area. I had a very successful and
growing experience exposing people at my Alma Mater (Swarthmore College) to Contact in Sept-
ember. As well as leading a week long workshop I presented an informal performance of Contact
with John Gamble and Jano Cohen. It was a rejuvenating experience for the three of us to work
together on the east coast even if briefly after a year of sharing in San Francisco. I have sent
Nancy a copy of the press which I received in the College Newspaper.
Since returning I have joined a group of dancers and potters who have built a beautiful studio in
a space in Project Artaud. We call ourselves Centerspace and John Le Fan, who also recently joined,
and I are informally working together on Contact material on the new oak floor. With the support
of the others in Centerspace I have also been able to welcome Contacters from around the Bay
Area to a weekly round-robin work session on Sunday Afternoons. Curt Siddall and I are hoping
this will continue through the winter, occasionally shifting to the East Bay or to Nita's new space
when it is ready. I have asked people to bring a dollar to put towards Centerspace which is broke
at present - the time is 1:30 - 5 PM Sundays at 2840 Mariposa and all who have done Contact
before are welcome to participate, others to watch.
Joining Centerspace has also provided me with a wonderful space for teaching Contact, a desire
I have had since the experience at Swarthmore in September. During the six weeks I have been
back I have talked at length with both Nita and Curt about taking on this responsibility in relation
to Contact. As a result of those conversations I have asked Curt to act as an advisor and consult-
ant of sorts as I begin teaching. He has happily accepted as this will simply be an extension of the
kind of sharing we are doing personally and through dancing together Sundays and hopefully other
times in the future. I will begin teaching at Centerspace with an intensive holiday workshop: six
sessions four hours each - Mon-Wed-Fri 1-5 PM the weeks of December 22 and 29. I request
that people commit themselves to the whole workshop and the cost is $35. In January I plan to
begin regular classes on a weekly basis in two hour blocks with the request that people attend two
classes a week. January will be the first time that two people will be teaching Contact in the same
city at the same time as Nita and I will both be offering classes. This is potentially a situation of
tension; I hope it won't prove to be such, rather that it can be seen as a first time in which Contact
is really available to people, especially in the city of San Francisco.
I had a vision on my way back west last fall resulting from a response someone had on seeing Contact;
he said it looked to him like non-competitive sport. My vision: Contact being taught in Phys. Ed.
Departments across the country, transforming the consciousness and physicality of gym programs
everywhere ... a new meaning for that old term 'contact sports' ... physical education becomes truly
an opening and ex tending of the possibilities of physical motion particularly with another rather
than against another. .. fitness becomes a means toward expression of self and relating to others ...
Contact Improvisation a spectator sport with singles and doubles improvisation, intercollegiate
round robins and coverage on Wide World of Sports ... slow motion replays of stunning moments
of contact. .. the longstanding struggle to get dance out of the p.e. departments, remove it from
phys ed consciousness to that of a creative art form, is reversed as Contact Improvisation moves
into Physical Education and transforms it!! What a dream!!

LISA NELSON:
'whats news? contact newsletter. a treat. solidifying right before our eyes. the variety of returns
especially edifying. Danny's been teaching some beautiful sessions combination release technique n
contact Uust as David W reports) a superb interloping. My hip joints rejoice. Danny comes down from
Jamaica Vt. 2x weekly, i find space at Benn. College n 5 to 7 of us do it together. The one night a
week in No. Benn. was delicious to begin with ... a different ambience each meet. No need for round
robins cause the space so large we all fit dancing or watching or both, naturally falling out of warm up
into couples n sometimes trios n lots of mats for tender spines. Recently Thursday nite volleyball
has usurped us and a Friday night replacement gleaned myself and 3 relative newcomers. Oosh, and I
had promised myself I would not be placed in a responsible position relative to Contact but neverthless
there we were and my refresher course consisted of meditations on falling and contact was birthed
once again. And I was reminded of my nack for appropriateness in teaching or guiding or whathaveyou
and ultimately it was a pleasure to care. Danny will be coming down and staying with us for a couple
of weeks and we will work every day hooray ..... Video ..... tapings of Barton Food Coop near Madbrook,
a what-is-it?, how-to form, tapings of Planned Parenthood Patients Group, much the same form, tapings
of the Laban Efforts, translations of the physical efforts to camera efforts (this I like) .....
.... TRANSCRIPTIONS: a series of transcriptions from video to movement - learning movements
off video image .
.... TRANSCRIPTIONS: of verbal play during Grand Union performances fascinating meta-morformosis
into literary using both a sound tape and video tape for clues as to what was actually said also including
crucial stage directions ...
.... TRANSCRIPTIONS: my entry in the contact newsletter. Amused and amazed me. Particularly the
part about the dried apples. Did I really write that ... Ain't it the truth. I never did get around to it...,
L.iSA: ao~ 3'3 / NoA-T»-B'1'N~1N~~ J vr. <>'"2s:r
LAUREL SPRIGG:
'I studied contact in its formative stages with Steve Paxton at Bennington College in Vermont where
I was a dance major. I contributed to the early 'contact manual', which was a class project. I have used
contact information in my own improvisational dance composing, performing and teaching since that
time. I have received an M.A. degree in dance in a program of my own design specializing in the per-
forming and teaching of improvisational dance. January 197 5 I attended the contact workshop at
Natural Dance Studio in Oakland led by Steve Paxton, Curt Siddall, Nita Little & Nancy Stark Smith.
Now in fall of 197 5 I h
_
ave been studying contact with Curt Siddall. I am currently teaching improv-
isational dance in San Francisco and have included many contact workshops in my regular classes late
this fall. I am also now a guest teaching at Ed Mack's studio & teaching Contact there on Thursday
mornings. My regular classes are Monday & Wednesday 1 - 3 at the Fillmore St. Studio. I also attend
the Sunday Round Robin at Centerspace.

DANNY LEPKOFF:
Since last June I've been living on my families land in Vermont working as a cook in a
Steak House. In 6 months I saved [some money] saw the summer change to fall and winter now
beginning. All summer I was involved in very intense solo dance work - I was into taking long
runs and dancing whlks through the woods - I had favorite places. I gave a solo performance on my
mother's birthday for friends who lived up and down the road. Which was my best solo performance
work I think I've done.
Lately I've been teaching some classes 1 or 2 a week in Bennington with a dynamite group
of people. I'm teaching a mixture of Contact & release images and movements. I'm dying to get
back together with this group and begin working with these people again after a break of several
weeks. I am planning to travel to the West Coast. I'm trying to get some week long contact work-
shop gigs - I've written to and/or in Seattle and plan to be there around the end of January ...
-----
I envision spending some time on the West Coast. ...
P.S. Got a definite teaching gig in Missoula Montana Jan 12 - Jan 18.
DAVID WOODBERRY:
" 12/22/75 I'm working at the Byrd School every day on a new piece by Robert Wilson and
Philip Glass. A 4 hr. opera called "Einstein on the beach." We rehearse thru March 7 (paid) then
we have a long break till mid July when we go to Avignon France and tour around for 3¥2 months.
We return to do the show on Broadway in Dec. which means my life if planned for a year except
March 7 to mid July and that is when I plan, dream, play, think, of coming West. It kinda depends
on what is happening here when March arrives. But I need a break from N.Y.C.
I've stopped teaching because of this time commitment to Wilson. Actually it was pretty
freaky. The last class a girl got hurt, the only injury sustained in 3 months and I was her partner.
It was a personal fam< pas stupid showing off on my part and she wasn't that experienced.
Anyways a lot of people got a lot better at the dance and in touch with their bodies & other bodies
in space and it was generally successful. Annette [La Rocque] substitute taught for 2 of my classes
and had a good time. She also was in a 12 hour dance last night celebrating winter solstice (which I
missed). . ... So thats what I want to do DANCE center release and caring.

By providing the parameters for interdependent relationships between humans and earth,
Contact Improvisation becomes a vehicle for direct participation with body surfaces and
gravity. The result is a co-evolu
_
tion of intuitive body messages and inertia travel that suspends
time and opens peripheral vision. Suddenly, the panorama is revealed ...
To facilitate constructive and meaningful growth of Contact, Nancy Smith will join me in
Olympia, Washington at the Evergreen State College for a workshop the weekend of January 16,
17, 18. Further details available from either Nancy or myself.

For me this certainly was the season for contact (fall). Counting .up since September 1st
I've accumulated 98 class/hours of contact; that is with me teaching, whew! Lots of work accom-
plished, and about 20 new people into the form. As for myself in the work I'm finally becoming
vitally aware of my movement patterns to the point where I can recognize or recall certain ones.
The next step, the most difficult one, is to let go of them and discover new places in the midst of
that controlled abandon. This is a wonderful feeling; I remember how frequently it used to happen
when my body was new in Contact and everything was new, and more often surprising than now.
The best space for working with this is in a solo, for all that happens there is totally you; either
an honest or dishonest you or a stuck or free you. Afterall: half the form is "Improvisation".
My Tues/Thurs evening class had it's last session last week. This one was primarily non-dancers
or rather 60/40 towards non-dancers. This class showed me some weird problem/obstacles; I had
to stress frequently that actually I cannot teach Contact, I can only facilitate the students dis-
covery of the necessary focus/concentration/control. I can teach skills that help in many energy
pathway situations, and I can set up relaxing situations in which it is easy to dance, but I cant teach
contact or get peoples energy up. Many of my night students work days and would come to class
moping and energyless. Contact can only be what you bring to it. I work days too, but have p!enty
of energy at night. I urged my students to "improve their environment" i.e. daily attitudes of
external and internal, diet, associations, and places. Amazingly enough none of them smoked, which
of course dulls memory, and appetite as well as destroying alveoli in the lungs, reducing lung capacity.
Al. so in the class we had to help some people break through the barrier of social uptightness.
Doing contact is just like talking. Though some people do contact better than they talk.
The morning class is for Footloose Dance Co. They're wonderful. All dancers, all attend each
class no-one gets left behind and they already all know each other so inhibitions are no problem.
It's just that they're technical dancers and don't know what to do when the "teacher" isn't instructing
all the time. Oh well it's a fun class, and the work ge ts better all the time. 

I'm now working in a group with four other men: Aaron Hemmen, Byron Brown, Jim
Tyler and John LeFan. The last (first) four meetings have been with "5-some contact" or
Quintact. The score is that each individual is as committed to the other four as one is to the other
in a duet. The beautiful physical form is that rolling points of contact pass freely and smoothly
from body to body. Individuals pass from partner to partner without attachment. We presented
this piece to the Symposium and were well received and well fed back. We'll be performing soon
around the Bay Area under the name, 'Mangrove'.

Checking the second newsletter to see where I was last time I wrote .... oh yes, wandering the streets.
It's amazing how much can happen in just a month and a half. I'm quite thoroughly settled here in
San Francisco, now, in a wonderful space that just fits my current dimensions. The process of making
a new space brought me and Nancy together in creating the Contact Symposium. Actually, we didn't
really create it, rather we structured a situation in which people involved in Contact could gather for
at least seven hours a day to discuss the contact form and its structural possibilities. The week,
(dee 8 - 13th) was a collaboration between a-round sixteen people (Eleven consistant members) which
included three artists outside the movement forms - one painter, poet, and musician, who shared their
forms (structures?) with us through workshops. The week was a powerful blending and sharing of
ideas and possibilities which were most concretely manifest in the "projects" - pieces, demonstrations,
and discussions - that we were all responsible for, and turned into great idea-outlets. In discussing
the Symposium after the fact, Nancy and I both agreed that it was one of the more rewarding endeavors
we've involved ourselves in, being a fluid interchange between output and intake - we both received
back in a high transmutted form the energy we put out to make the situation happen. San Francisco
is warm, and often times hot.
Another note about the Symposium. Pia, from Oregon, a video taper came down and documented a
fair amount of the activities that took place. Also there were some audio tapes of the discussion, as
well as about eleven hands writing in eleven books. Nancy and I have hopes of compiling this material
in a form that people who weren't participating can get a hit off all the heat generated.
Oh, too, the Symposium took place here on Howard Street, leaving this space with a pure green
caste. A wonderful initiation.
Le t's see, the next few months are to be madly full for me. January 5th I'm returning to teaching
classes on Mondays and Wednesdays, looking much forward to that. Also, there's a possible gathering
of contactors to work out here on Tuesdays. February 12th I'm doing a concert at the Berkeley
Museum of Art at 8:00 PM. The piece is based on contact. .. and that 's all I can say here and now.
And ... I'm currently working on the design of an adult jungle jim to be constructed in a hugh 500 room
condemned hotel half a block away. The jungle-jim piece is titled: (32ft/sec)2, and will be included

NITA LITTLE (contd)
in a week long extravaganza by Ginny Quesada Feb 21 -.. Right now it's touch and go as to whether
my participation in " A Night ~ the Reno Hotel" will be actualized - money? time?
Forgot to mention the title of the Berkeley piece is: These objects ~ handed to ~ through
! hole: ! guartet.
More for February: a teaching gig in Santa Cruz on Sunday the 15th, anyone interested in participating
can come down with me ... And a possibility of teaching in Vancouver at Synergy for the last two
weeks of that month. Whew ........................ .
March? I'm waiting 'till then.
***** That's the new news, now I'd like to direct myself towards an item in John Gamble's Contact
Workshop announcement that was included in the November Newsletter. In this announcement he
says that Contact Improv " .. was developed by Nita Little and Steve Paxton about three years ago ... "
This item has me concerned because it is incorrect information that is being distributed publicly.
Contact was developed by me and Steve, and Nancy, and Curt, and Annie, and Karen and David, ..... and
you. It originated back east about three and a half (now headed for four!) years with us and a number
of other people - some who aren't even doing it now - in the formal sense. I appreciate that John
attempted to give recognition to Contact's origin but I do feel that when this is done, it must be done
with care. I appreciate being recognized as one of the "finders" of the form, but I also find it an
uncomfortable position to be in if the other "finders" aren't also recognized. In my own announcements
I try to be careful to acknowledge that there was other input during those first months other than me,
Steve, Nancy, Curt, Lo, Emily, Danny, David, Leon ... so it can be touchy because the beginning has
not been distinctly defined. All these people nee~not be named, of course that's impossible, there were
varying degrees of involvement etc. But the core of us would appreciate an acknowledgement of the
others. Contact is an information relay where accuracy within the transfer is a vital responsibility to
avoid myth making, right?
I may have made more of this than I intend - I guess its only to make a point ...

JERRY ZIENTARA:
17 December 1975
Churches Should Have Statues: Notes on TRIO
Continuing to investigate the nature and possibilities of trio form in contact improvisation
has provided me with a few notes. The ideas here have been considered theoretically and worked
on practically.
As might be expected, trio gravity is heavier than duo gravity; hence it usually moves slower.
Also, since the amount of data is geometrically increased, each mover within the trio is always process-
ing a large amount of information, which tends to invite slow movements, and deliberate weighings
and balancings. Unfamiliarity with the funny array of limbs and torsos frequently gives pause.
(co11t1,,u~d)
CONTACT NEWSLETTER DECEMBER
JERRY ZIENTARA: (contd)
However, as trio teams accustom themselves to this structure, momentum can, and does, move
faster. The tendency to stick together, glued into a triple contact (each partner in contact with two
others) can expand into sandwiching (one partner in contact with both others while each of the
others in contact with only one: 0 - 0 - 0). Opening the triangle up like a fan covers more ground,
moves into more space, and allows for more possibilities. In the row, or sandwich, formation, the
middle partner is like a bridge. Impulses from the two outer partners cross and merge, and the outer
partners can sense each other solidly via the central person. The connection moves sometimes in waves,
rippling through each body in tum, beginning a gesture in one, passing it through the next, and fling-
ing off into space through the third. Simultaneous waves may flow in several directions at once, and
at differing rhythm.
When there is a trio, it is more than a duet with another person looking for a way in; rather
it is a single dance with six legs and one groupmind. Cues may be double or treble, but all move by
the same motion. Certain beauties occur in trio: triple rolls; parallel or reflected pivotings of two
partners over a moving axis embodied by the third mover; loops off that look like breaks but are
mixed orbits; unusual elevations: churches should have statues of some of these moments.
Suggestions for trio tries: work from post exercises - two people form a post (head opposite
directions to form a solid table) for the other to climb on, roll over, lean against so's to learn to use
the double partner as a single mass (it's very secure feeling, by the way); also, one person stands as
post while two others work simultaneously up, on, over, against, under, through. Following into
phrases, just as in duet practise, will lead to some unexpectable openings.

for the dancers of the Contact Symposium: Coming to Meet
Looking the yellow chair in between the eyes the
Yellow chair replicates itself in modem timing
Over past the fireplace, by the sofa, soft corner
But I'm not moving to tune any music but my
Black line of inkstaining along the way, along
The way - and along the way I would write
You a little loveletter along the way for you
To take along your way about the way
I almost long, almost too close,. for you, morning,
On waking. Along the way to waking, you,
Morning, drift, hands extended very gently
And in the little loveletter we sit together
Several times over in every yellow chair,
Every two alike, leaning each up by each
Other: wherever any yellow chair may bide.
Now are so many of you, little loveletter
To be ribboned up along so many ways
Let's just steal off silent by morning, between our eyes.


What a treat to receive the newsletter! The "contact" is real important to me - sometimes this
mountain retreat can feel just plain isolated.
Bob McGinley wrote & told me of his plans for starting a workshop at Evergreen College. I hope to
make it over there when you come up in January (Nancy). Also heard from Danny Lepkoff who plans
to come through Missoula about the same time. He wants to teach a week of classes. I dont think
there will be any problem getting an aware & receptive group together.
I've been using contact in a variety of ways. One group (6 - 8 people) meets one
_ evening a week -
space is at a premium here or it would be more often. They are basically non-dancers & it's been a
joy to watch the discovery register on their faces. We've been taking the steps very gradually, slowly
& gently getting into weight taking & giving. I'm also holding off on showing any tapes of Steve et.al.
so that people will discover their own paths toward higher energy encounters. At Cal Arts I suspected
that the tapes got people so excited that they started "going for it" instead of allowing it.
danceMontana, a professional dance company based here in Missoula is interested in contact and worked
it into their weekly rehearsal schedule. Interesting to watch the carry overs into other aspects of the
group's interaction. (a lot more open & sharing).
Since the centering work is so essential to any kind of efficient movement, I've been borrowing contact
forms, without calling it "contact" for use in a beginning modem technique class I'm teaching at the
University. They didn't quite know what to think when I had them rolling around, doing energy pathway
exercises, etc. But they finally decided it was a lot of fun & gave up wondering why.
Most recently, aJudo/Aikido student & I.have discovered each other. I'm looking forward to our
mutual sharing & explorations.

Last letter from Steve came from ] apan; we got it during the Symposium. He was over there doing
performances at some department store gallery with the Gr.and Union. Should be back in the States
by now. Will be out on the West Coast with the Grand Union in late April and we're going to cook
up some Contact action out here to ·precede (early to mid April) his GU dates. More on that when
it happens.

NANCY STARK SMITH:
Greetings. Looks as though my contact activities are taking another swing out into the wilds to
taste new blood. Away from the linear arrangement of classes on Fridays, workouts on Thursdays,
Newsletter on everyanyday, occasional workouts with city (San Fran.) folks, and back to chaos. Oh boy.
The Friday beginning contact class in Point Reyes is officially over though we're continuing to meet
& dance & talk together. A local West Marin woman, Denny Something, is hooked up with a cable
station & is interested in doing some video work with us. She came last week & took some tape -
though the lighting was poor it gave some of the new dancers a chance to see the inherent possibilities
of working with video. For our last class we combined forces with the Pt. Reyes workshop (veteran
contacters), invited friends and did a round robin for them. It seems important for people to be able
to share the work in some way with friends - the form (Contact) begins to creep into their lives
during the week between classes & there is a need to somehow sanction this integration. There are,
of course, many ways to approach this integration - a presentation is one. In addition, for me,
performing the work, or more accurately, doing contact in the midst of attentive observers (however
few) is an additional and important lesson in contact's relationship to attention (energy input). I
actually have a lot of information that I've gleaned from teaching contact that I would love to share
with everyone but I think I'll wait. In the opening Newsletter letter I've mentioned some possible
ways for beginning to use the Newsletter as a forum of ideas in addition to an activity announcement.
So I'll wait to see how everyone feeds back on that idea before I start blowing.
In Nita's news-letter she talks of the Symposium - I'll send the letter along that was sent to local
contacters as an invitation. I was particularly impressed with the tone the week's activities maintained.
It began and further developed into a warm nourishing environment in which each participant emerged
as a valuable fellow; each contributing generously the ideas that their work with contact had exposed.
So varied, but inevitably all stemming from a surprisingly cohesive overall understanding. The work
that was presented was very exciting to me. For one thing, we all seemed ready to move beyond the
round robin structure, recognizing its merits and not totally abandoning it, but interested in putting
contact into some new contexts to see what more there is to see of it in the new light. So: we got
into multiple contacts, from glancing trios into duets into solos duets trios and sometimes all of us
together, feeding in and branching off. The idea of working with colors came up often during the
week; Ehmroiel led a color chakra meditation, and Margaret Fisher brought different colorpastel loose
clothes for us to put on and dance in. We did duets with a particular color in mind to see what that
would do to the danc. ing, and one night we got a black light and wore different combinations of
white and black clothes and danced. That was a strange one; no depth perception at all - it was like
dancing in the dark with a blinding random white light passing across your eyes; touch was all - no
forethought or cue acknowledgement possible: NOW WEIGHT HERE, NOW WEIGHT THERE.
Two people led us through some solo structures, ways to work with solos - a ball of weight riding
inside your body that you let carry you around (internal contact point) - getting into a standing
meditation and having your partner exert a little pressure on a part of your body as an impulse and
you follow it out and come back to the Stand for another. We got into pairs and silently , with colored
crayons and a piece of paper did a drawing together before the dance, then danced, then did a drawing
together after the dance and compared them. Lots of stuff - maybe there will be some special issue
of stuff from the Symposium that will get out to everyone. Pia Perniciaro taped all week and I'll be
up in Eugene in late J anuary to edit the tape with her. We'll see what happens ...

NANCY STARK SMITII: (contd)
As for my future plans - - The second half of jalrnary I'll be buzzing around the NorthWest corner
teaching contact workshops and dancing with new people. At Evergreen State College in Olympia,
Washington, Bob McGinlcy and I will do a weekend workshop to start a group of people going and
he'll contimic working with them after I leave. While I'm up North I 'II he going up to Vancouver to
do a week of contact with some old and new contactcrs, then Seattle fur a pot luck dance. Fact has it
that some East Coast contact fellows will be com irig this way then: Danny Lepkoff, David Woodberry,
and hopcf ull y Lisa Nelson. We're hoping to hook up up there somewhere and do something together.
rr not, we'll convene down here in the Bay Arca and see what we can cook up. Planning to start
another lJcginning class in Marin in February, either at the Dance Palace in Pt Reyes or through Faultline
l,nstitutc in Bolinas, do nt know ye t. Theres some summer plans brewing for Montreal and Boulder
I ?ut I'll pass that on when the details are more complete.
One more t~1ing. During th e Sy mposium my "project presentation" ~as c;1 flcd Corresponc~_.
I've had the word in my head si nce the summer but hadnt hecn quite sure what it was abot1t, so I
tried it on for size. I chose a dtiet partper that I had worked with for a few months in the Pt Reyes
workshop and whom I felt could enter a smooth c01itinuous contact flow without my guiclanc~, but
of course with my participation. So we entered a physical conversation -:- a 50-5·0 in,tcrfacc, letting
our bodies move to facilitate the d;1nce ... leaving our masses to respond and follow the physical laws
by which they arc governed. Anyway, then ... after having established a clear physical communication,
another person, from outside the duct, initiated a verbal conversation with me, a casual dialogue that
went on simultaneously with the physica l convcrsafion. The idea is this : l Leli eve that our hodies can
clothe dance instinctively, that our cognitive minds arc not necessary for the dance to take place, a1id
that the cognit ivc mind ca n be used while the dance goes on, in a context totally sepai·aie from the
dan ce, (the verbal conversation having nothing to do with the dancing [what arc your favorite words
in Itafi;in[) without Laking· away from the quality of comnumication between the physical partners.
The only instruction given to the dan ce partner is to ignore the verbal conversation and if he/she feels
that my cognitive mind is drawing energy away from the dance; to remind me ph ysically of the contact
point ;ind get me hack . My job as the interface between the two conversations (physical and verbal)
is to ca rry on, allowing my body to take priority if necessary, meaning that if I'm in the middle of
a precarious situation and I need my full attention, then I'd delay the answer to the question till m y body
felt comfortable alone. It is mostly for comfort that the conversation is delayed; ultimately when case
in this form comes, all situations will be handleable. Anyway, it worked real we IL IL felt to be, '.lnd ·
other observers agreed, one of the smoothest, expansive _
duets all week, new spaces explored, new
strengths tapped. l'r~ interested in working more with this form, perhaps towards a place where poetry
is spoken from inside the duct without interrupting it. I'm getting a little long winded here, so I'll stop.
l'm still liv.ing in Stinson Beach (P.O. Box 297 /Stinson Beach, Ca. 94970) and welcome commun-,
ication of any sort. If you're m the area, call ( 415-868-0275) a nd 'vv~'ll arrange some dancing and~ /or
gathering of some sort.
Nancy
l'rl-N1€2NJ£:
About two yef!rs ago Bill J0nes gave me a flyer for a "C0ntact"
workshop "If you dig love making, wrestling, tai chi, etc." The
come on seemed unpretlentious and I went. The form, the d~mce, contact was
greater than my first adolescent psychotheraputic revela t ion .,nd about on par
with acid •...• . I've been dP.ncing since then with Lois Welk, (the lady who
put out the flyer) and Bill Jones. From my initial "l~fiif, "contact" experience
to now I've put in 2-3 months of ballet - loved it and h.qted it. Am now doing
Karate w:ith Mos t er Hidy Ochiai.
11/..f If one risked me about dance style I'd say I'm being raised on basic
contact - es it wis passed from Steve raxton t0 Lois Velk and Uie directions
that we at :the American Dance Asylum are finding for ourselves. S0me of the
thinr, s ' ... d th whi.ch I 1;1m concerned are (a) the cnntrndiction tf.l.i in performing
contPct ~nd hA~ing i t bP ~en11:in8 r.qthPr th~n stunty -- I 10v~ lifts, aerial things
dives, rolls, etc. --- I love em! a.nd (b) re1i.lly being ablP t0 let go wjth my he11d.
I f 1myone reads this and is :mywhere near Binghamton, N. Y., c0me on down
and let's do some contact.




CQ 2

EDITOR LETTER:
Dear Number Four,
FEBRUARY 26 1976
We continue. We voices. New voices. Old voices with new news. And all of a sudden, translating all the hands
into the same type, typing one after the other on the same pages, in the same sitting, well, I was buzzing... the
potency of this circuit is at times overwhelming. It also becomes evident with each issue that each Newsletter
takes on its own voice and each is an exposition of another sort. Sobeit.
Now for business. We got about 10 bucks through the envelopes this time. Not bad. Plus some suggestions for
how to handle the finances that you'll see in the letters. One other suggestion that came up was to apply for a
grant. Seems that a local informed source thinks we've got a chance. I've written to her to set a meeting to look
into it. Will keep you posted.
Inquiries about the Contact Fund. In Newsletter Number Two (I think) the editor letter explained how the fund
was set up. It was intended that people who were getting some revenue from their work with Contact would put
10% of NET earnings (after expenses) into the Fund. Our only idea for the use of the Fund was either as a
"fronter" of money for contact events (concert publicity, video tapes, photographs for files), and/or as a place
in which to let $ accrue & then buy something with it like a video portapak or something. We never really had
it straight - we figured we'd see what would happen... At that time Koriel was serving as manager so the Fund
was kept in a safe deposit box in The Bank of America in Point Reyes Station, California, which was accessible
to him. With the termination of his term as manager, the money was left in the Box. Living in a commune, Koriel
shared the box & key with 2 other communards & I have access to the Fund through them. Since little informa-
tion was passed on to the increasing flow of working contacters about the Fund, it has become virtually inactive,
except I've taken the liberty to use about 10 dollars of Fund money for each Newsletter, as the infrequent dol-
lars sent didn't cover costs. David Woodberry sent $15.00 from a workshop a few months ago & I used that for
the last Newsletter, so as for the Box, I haven't had any contact with it for a number of months. I may need
another 10 spot for this issue so I'll check the balance then. [$ 85.00
So for now, what? Checks to the Fund can be made payable to me, Nancy Stark Smith - I'll be getting my
name on the Box and getting a key. A Contact Improvisation checking account seems a bit unwieldy to me
at this point. Besides it could get confusing as to who decides where to spend the $. A possibility is that we
officially do use the Fund to finance the Newsletter. It seems to be something all contacters benefit from.
Anyway, its a possibility - thats the updated story on the Contact Fund. Feedback welcomed.
Next topic. For the last two issues I've waited to type & reprint the Newsletter until there were enough letters
to warrant a publication (about 10 typed pages). I apologize for the delay to those who had their letters in by
Feb. 1 (3 people). The only problem with the present "laid back" approach is that some announcements out-
live their publicity value while we wait. But for now the Newsletter seems to serve more as an information cir-
cuit than a publicity one. So this is the Spring 76 issue. Our pace seems to be one issue every two months.
So that means the next one will be out in early Summer, (maybe we're a seasonal publication). That all means
that I need to have all contributions in the Stinson Beach PO Box by the middle of May, in order to get the is-
sue out by the first week in June, (they may need to be forwarded East as I am interested in a traveling form
which would grow into perhaps a rotating or guest editorship.)
In this issue all the addresses and such details are on one page in the back.
Also, I've been making extra copies of each Newsletter for people wanting to buy it after it's out. So if anyone
asks you if & where they can get a copy, tell them to send their name, address & one dollar to CONTACT
NEWSLETTER / PO Box 297 /Stinson Beach, Ca. 94970 and it will be done.


MCGINLEY:
" Dear Contact- 2/2/76
"Our tissues change as we live: the food we eat and the air we breathe
become flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone, and the momentary
elements of our flesh and bone pass out of our body everyday with
our excreta. We are but whirlpools in a river of everflowing water.
We are not stuff that abides, but patterns that perpetuate themselves.
A pattern is a message, and may be transmitted as a message."
Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, p.130
From a cybernetic point of view, Contact may be seen as a process of transmitting patterns of messages
contained in the flesh and bone of human organisms... "whirlpools." In the past year I have random ly
leapt into Cybernetics and communication theory in an attempt to articulate, at least in my own spacey
brain, what the hell is coming off when engaged in the paralinguistics of Contact. I feel that there are
some important social implications, i.e. contact as a step toward softening the hard edges of a social
structure based on " Nice guys finish last " philosophies. Contact not only melts bodies together - but
consciousness too. Just as the life of Contact depends upon the sustenance of an ever-changing energy
pathway, living things rely on homeostatic balance capable of making continual adjustments for survival
in a dying (entrophic) world. [Witness goosebumps (insulation) and perspiration (air-conditioning) - -
Thermostatic action].
Well, so much for the theoretical. Mid-January, Nancy came up for a three day workshop at Evergreen
State College. Of course there were some inevitable bureaucratic hassles; Contact had to compete with
Womens Karate for space, etc. blah-blah but we came thru the weekend with an energized group that I
work with twice a week.
Few nites ago had a dream of kindergardeners in jumpsuits rolling, molding, climbing, hanging, writhing
and thriving...

LACHMAN:
"...We in DC are continuing to meet twice a week. There are about 6 of us addicts and another
4 or 5 who come less predictably. We've decided to keep Sunday mornings for the regulars and Tuesday
nights for new people - we realized we were expending inordinate amounts of energy doing the intro
spiel for people who never returned. We also decided to make it a "policy" to have people watch one
session to see if it's something they want to do. Also, obvious as it seems, I had the brilliant insight
that it's a good idea for a person to see a round robin before they attempt any contact. We also want
to focus on an aspect of contact each time, for there have been feelings of scatteredness among mem-
bers of the group. Lots of plateaus...
Peter Volkert has been editing the American University summer dance tape with Maine rocks,
water, woods, etc. [The tape was taken during a presentation given by the Contact Improvisation class
that Steve and Nancy taught at AU last ('75) summer in Washington D.C. The class met five days a week
for four weeks.] Very exciting so far. He'll also start videoing us, for his & our use. He suggested a
videoletter among us distant contacters. Anyone else interested?"

And on the other side of the card had a map to get to his place in Maine. All I can say is you take the
Pittsfield exit off Interstate 95 about 150 miles into Maine from New Hampshire. Anyway, though the
event is passed and Scott's exact whereabouts are unknown, I just wanted to pass on the known facts.


NOTES AFTER TEACHING SECOND CLASS IN MISSOULA MONTANA
After teaching I walked home and sat and talked
with Janet - I realized today that 1 am not
interested in the form of Contact Improvisa-
tion but in the spirit the form contains - this
spirit is a real thing and with out the spirit
Contact turns into something like Judo - the
spirit is a living work process that is not nec-
essarily confined to Contact Improvisation but
is a way of playing of attaining the freedom
to play with yourself and others with a tree
or a pole. I want to drum up this spirit. In
teaching Contact I feel two things:
1. That I know and understand the form
but in order to convey the spirit through
the form I must find a something to
teach which is not outside to myself but
is me
E VOLUE
2. I've c o m e here t o Missoula and I feel
that the form "Contact" is pretty much
common knowledge or thought to be by
alot of people and there are lots of ex-
pectations to what it is - "Get out the
mats - do a round robin"

o I think in order to teach the spirit of con-
tact I cannot teach Contact.
I want to create a situation in which free play
-FREE PLAY - can happen -
Where a certain concentration is going - with
a certain practice - and nothing happens until something is happening
I want to create a situation where
1 nothing happens (an exhausted state)

SO TEACH A CLASS IN WHICH YOU REACH A STATE WHERE NOTHING IS HAPPENING BUT POS-
SIBILITIES ARE OPEN - THATS ALL YOU HAVE TO DO - - - - - - S U R P R I S E S - - VOICE WORK -
SHOUT A WORD TO EACH OTHER - - - - GO OUT AND TAKE A WALK AROUND THE ROOM---

DANNY LEPKOFF (contd):
3RD C LASS MISSOULA WORKSHOP
Well today I came in feeling very relaxed and I kept in my head that I wasnt going to teach Contact
but do something different - I let my concentration develop as the class went - slow precise warmups
I used forced inhalation and exhalations
with arm stretches
plies and squats in parallel
then group forming of circle - group walking coming to a circle together - let the circle pass thru your body
and rhythmic lessening and chanting a
circle warmup - I think the spirit developed a lot more. "
**; * * * * * *
KRIS WHEELER:
" Contact Improv in Seattle? Sure. If you're looking, you'll find it in a variety of places - on the dance
floor of any number of taverns, in the experimental college catalogue of the UW, at an American Contemp-
orary Dance co performance, at the Pelican Bay Artist Co-op or the and/or gallery as an occasional evening
of letting ones spirit soar into movement, and in many homes where folks delight in play.
After Steve Paxton, Nancy Smith, and Lisa Nelson were here (January of 1975) for a workshop
at the and/or gallery, there was a group of people who continued meeting weekly with the special attention
of Gail Lorien (now at UCLA). This group does not still meet yet there exists people who enjoy coming
together to dance occasionally. This happened at the and/or one evening a few weeks ago when Nancy and
Lisa, and two of their friends Christie and Danny were in town. There was beautiful dancing and wonderful
music with Andy Schloss' assortment of ethnic instruments. Emöke of the Pelican Bay Artist Co-op intends
to facilitate bringing people together again and again. I intend to teach a workshop of contact improv
through the experimental college at the university, and to continue playing with it in the dance collectives
I participate in.
When I want to get folks together for dancing, I use the mailing list that Ann Folke (of the and/or)
has from Steve's workshop, and I also get in touch with others that I know are interested. We can some-
times get together at the and/or, or Pelican Bay, or sometimes on the UW campus. Coming to town and
want to dance? G e t in t o u c h w i t h me !
Kris Wheeler "
* * * * * ＊ ＊ * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
CURT SIDDALL:
Curt has been performing throughout the Bay Area with Mangrove, mentioned in Byron Brown's letter. He
continues to be an active working member of the woodworking cooperative, Heartwood, in Berkeley. He
performed in Nita Little's piece, " These objects were handed to us through a hole: a quartet" at the
Berkeley Museum on February 12. He'll be teaching a contact workshop at Naropa Institute this summer with
Nita and Nancy in Boulder.

BYRON BROWN:
"The last two months have been very active exciting ones for me in terms of contact. First and foremost
has been the birth and initiation of a new performing company, Mangrove. On January 30 we completed
a series of six performances, three in San Francisco, one at Point Reyes and two in Berkeley. The next
night we held a celebration party at Centerspace to provide an opportunity for sharing of the energy we
felt was generated during the month - it was a wonderful coming together of friends from many different
movement contexts, dancing, boogeying, jamming together. The performances themselves we felt pleased
about; the five of us (Curt Siddall, Aaron Hemmen, Jim Tyler and John LeFan and I ) developed through
our improvisational process a solid and powerful group contact. From this basis of connection we began
to explore our group and individual processes as we perform. Each performance was very different as the
audience, the space and our own process changed. And repeatedly we as a group come back to the contact
work which is so central to our work and it continues to bear fruit for us as a way of creating and being
together. Aaron has now gone to Alaska for seven months so we are four and will probably continue as
such for a while though we hope to invite people to come and work with us in rehearsal. We are also in
the process now of exploring who we are and how we relate to the community through photo work, video
(three of our performances were taped) and hopefully through writing. In addition we are looking forward
to performing again hopefully in March. We would appreciate very much any input, performance possibilities
and referrals, etc. that any fellow contacters might have. And please come see us, dance with us share your
energy. In that regard the Sunday afternoon jams continue to happen most every Sunday at Centerspace,
2840 Mariposa in the city. 1:30 to 4:30. $1. You can call me ahead any time if you want to make sure
it is happening. (415) 552 - 2508.
Besides Mangrove, I have been teaching now for two months. It has been a wonderful learning process for
me both about teaching, facilitating, guiding and about contact itself. My classes have been small which has
given me an opportunity to focus on individuals, increase my sensitivity to their processes and relate my
material to their places. That process of continually creating and discovering the present reality of a student's
relationship to contact is very exciting for me. I have received good feedback from students about my way
of presenting the material, which I am making very much mine, and that feels good; at the same time I
feel clear that my 'method' is grounded in the truth of contact, whatever that means in verbal terms. My
ongoing classes are Tuesday night 7-10 and Friday afternoon 3 - 6 at Centerspace.
Al for now...be alive! 

WOODY PLAUT and LINDA HANDELSMAN:
Woody and Linda have been randomly involved with contact for a number of years. While they were at
Oberlin College they danced with Curt Siddall and Nancy Smith in various workshops. Curt and Woody
collaborated on a workshop/demonstration at a Mens Conference in the MidWest at that time. Spot dances
with Steve Paxton and other contacters kept their bodies happening along contact lines. Recently they've
been living and schooling in Illinois and are anxious to start doing contact again. They write that they're
involved in starting a Contact Workshop in the local free school. 

JERRY ZIENTARA:
" . . . Definitely I believe, strongly, anyone who wants the newsletter & pays $1 per copy should receive
it. It is a genuine real phenomenon to have a circular letter, available only to the contributors. But
contact improvisation cannot be limited in availability to writer/dancers, or such. Personally, I'd like
to see a regular organization of the little publication. Parallel developments) with Frxx Movix Nxws
give(s) me notions: re subscriptions, for instance. If persons wishing to receive send as many dollars
as number of copies, a file could be kept. I'd even keep the file for six or nine months (I've done
subscriptions files before). Certainly there is also the "philosophic" question as to how hushhush the
form's to be wrapped in. But let's think - do we want copies in the NY Public Library Dance Collection?
I do. That is not promotional, but documentation, archival, research oriented service.
The Contact Improvisation Newsletter ( unwieldy name! ) need not appear regularly. Frequent enough
for announcements to make sense, yes. Not rarely. With a page of directory: names & addresses, class
meetings data, dates & schedules of events. Room for individual reports, observations, theoretical essays,
photos (1?@!*$!), drawings ("), reviews & interviews maybe - or odd items like dance pants patterns or poetry.
Is there relation between the news & the Contact fund? How is the fund? I'm fond of the idea -
who has the bankbook?
These & more questions. Will we meet again? Let's!
With affectionate regards,



THE WAVE WE MOVE
What data increases itself's magnet when men
Be drawn button to button, multiple curves
Angling nicely into every curve-system joy
Waiting all this while, wonder would murmur
Making contact: almost wanting to go too far
When will we get alone together at last to last
Long enough monument to the intricate
Lacy delicate deliciousness of a trail alive
With electricity comforting? Electing
Looks peer amid these winter sneaugh
(Going back that far, tribal migrations), see
Mistletoe deck tower of ivory, hello flag
Floff on breeze of invocatings so soft
Only two ears can hear it, your ear my ear
A pair of ears hat wings to vibration.


JERRY ZIENTARA (contd):
Opportunities for sharing data re contact improvisation, currently stored in this receptable
(or identity) arise, and Jerry, with Koriel, is moving to have the household members at home all now
progressing into loosening the stiff and becoming to grips with unsteady, early steps towards a whole
home full of contact improvisors; this dance now is part of our life, like cinema, music, and the quotidian,
which we all share.
A curious opportunity also recently to lead a workshop came as invitation from the Gay
Academic Union at San Francisco State, hosts for a northern Californian 3-day symposium in April.
A demonstration of our form, probably with 3 persons, will probably be scheduled as a performance,
in addition to the workshop. Unknown details pretty much, except 1) an as-yet-indefinite woman to
partner the workshop, 2) idea that workshop will explore cues and signals, 3) curious thoughts about
all the above and much more.
Notes on the sandwiching poems: both grow out of specific instants within dance-continuum,
and gather about those instants connections with phenomena of abiding concern to this one. Snapshots
in X-ray of unordinary moments movement was dwelling in are, or is, what some of this writing is up
to. The dedicatees, inspirers, know who they are by the clues, the cues, and the glances, the smiles.
THESE OBJECTS WERE HANDED TO US THROUGH
A HOLE : A QUARTET
Spelling anew a spell as it dissolves a spell
The spell applause is is air electric of zig
Zag, recognition as a limit, as a minute
Marks at a zone's edge new zone, be of yond beyond;
Is livening air overpregnant with heavy,
With still, too or over too or. On the wall might
Write of of or only of, or not at all, hover
On the mystery of unwritten mottos, spells,
Graces of breath coming as going home again again,
The seamless motion moving going come home again.


KAREN RADLER GREENFIELD:
"...So far my activity since returning [from a 6 month course with Maharishi] has been very simple -
moving into the house, a little shopping & visiting with family & friends. And a lot of time reading. I'm
looking for dancing to do - I met with John Gamble & Jano and the people they do contact with here in
Philadelphia. It was good in many ways but my body wasnt ready for much work - and so in a little while
I'll try again. But it's good to know it's happening here. Maybe I'll find some technique classes to take... I'll
probably just get a bike to ride around my neighborhood. And with all the space I have at home I can just
dance around here..."


STEVE PAXTON:
Contact Newsletter came today with all voices loud and clear, and snazzy cover to boot. How
many copies did you mail? [25]
About the newsletter support $ - I suggest a contest: essays on how to get the money from each
other without actually paying for it ourselves: best essay to win a free subscription until the newsletter
comes to a halt from lack of funds or no one to do the work - which ever happens first.
My entry: anyone selected for publishing gets that issue complementary anyone else wanting to
get a copy, $3. Place it in a bookstore or two - 50 copies all told.
Looking as good as it does, a copy should be sent to NY Public library Dance Collection at Lincoln
Center. Issues could be sent to dance publications, too.
You might consider selecting and training a volunteer replacement editor for when you hit the road..."
* * * * * * * * * * * *
* * *
DAVID WOODBERRY:
"...I'm in good health. There is a Contact performance Tues. Feb. 24 at St. Marks Church in NYC
8 - 1 PM with Steve, Lisa Nelson, Danny Lepkoff, Judy Padow, Paul Langland and me. Still planning
about westward trip via Southern route, maybe stop at Mardi Gras. Is there anyone on the way I should
stop & see? In our rehearsals we've been playing with 3 people - Also, with talking while dancing.
Filling out NEA Grant now & performing with Lucinda Childs.
Love to the west coast. look forward to re union. 

NITA LITTLE:
Nita just finished a successful concert at the Berkeley Museum on February 12 called "These objects were
handed to us through a hole: a quartet". Also dancing in that concert with Nita was Curt Siddall, Ehmroiel,
and Margaret Fisher. She hopes to do the piece again sometime in March. She has also been teaching contact
classes at her studio on 1014 Howard St in San Francisco, on Mon and Wed mornings and also one evening
a week. She, Curt and Nancy will be teaching Contact at Naropa Institute this coming summer during their
second session (July 19 - August 20) in Boulder, Colorado. Nita also recently went down to teach a workshop
in Santa Cruz. She'll be dancing in April with Nancy, Steve, David W, Curt and maybe Danny Lepkoff in
the Bay Area during a contact series called Re: Union 2 which is in its formative stages.

fellow dancers,
1 - 6 - 7 6
After my brief entry in the last letter I've decided to spend a little more paper space letting
you know what l'm doing.
I do use contact, aikido, modern technique information et al, however, I prefer to remain nondenom-
inational and so simplify by saying I dance my dance. My burning interest for the past five years or more
has been improvisational music and dance. Both my dance and my music were greatly inspired by contemp-
orary improvisational music composition which has provided endless ideas and structures for pieces and
performances.
My direction for several years now has been in uniting the two media with the same idea framework.
I have been singing & playing cello with a free music group in San Francisco called " CONTINUUM".
We're a group of 12 (saxophones, strings, percussion, clarinets & trumpets) and all compose pieces for
each other - (rarely conventionally notated). If you're in the area come by the Blue Dolphin at Sanchez
& 17th St. (our performing space) Thurs - Sun at 8 PM. The space unfortunately doesn't accommodate
dance - small; low ceiling; concrete floor - so those of us who both dance & play music go to wherever
else is available - Fillmore St. Studio, Lone Mountain College - wherever.
My performing interest is in crossing the boundaries of musician/dancer, improvisationally. Last
August '75 David Appel (Zoomba dance Co. of Boston) and I did a concert at Cat's Paw in Berkeley,
working on just that. It was titled ' One to One' and involved five people, four of whom danced & four
of whom played music, (obviously some did both).
I am interested in meeting any of you who are interested in all this - if you dance contact and play
a contact saxophone, do get in touch!
Teaching for the spring is as follows - Monday afternoons I will be teaching Contact at Ed Mock's
dance studio at Lafayette & Mission. Then on Tuesday and Friday mornings I'll be co-teaching a class
at Lone Mountain College called " Motion Matter & Madness" with a physicist and former Olympic level
gymnast. He will talk physics in a range from gravity to Black holes, and I will be teaching my own mix
of Contact and Spatial improvisation - a nice blend of information. I'm projecting dance performances
for April and music performances are on-going.

Having Danny here was wonderful. And it spawned some changes in my life. I quit the dance company
just could no longer push myself in that direction - and I'll be heading south as soon as my teaching com-
mittment is finished. I hear that you (Nancy), Curt & Nita are teaching at Naropa this summer. That
should be amazing. I'm interested in hearing what's planned cause I'm thinking about being there.
Deborah Hay was here doing her circle dances & got everybody high.
* dance Montana
With lots of good thoughts



STARK SMITH:
CONTACT NOTES -
" It is impossible to keep intention out of a work. If you don't put in voluntary intentions you put
in involuntary intentions. Involuntary intentions are confessions."
Cocteau
A Long for the ride / a definition:
Contact Improvisation is a way of interacting in space and time - an experiment of which your
bodymind is a sample - an inevitable reference.
Many forms of Contact Improvisation have existed for a long time - rubbing 2 flints to make fire -
an awareness of variables - an ability to Subject yourself to the illustration of an obvious but
carefully hidden world.
In the same way that "solo dancing does not exist," neither does solo living.
Local quotes: " You share moods with the thing you ride." Chrystie
" They're all sleeping in the same direction." Lisa
" The shape they make is the shape I take." Danny
"I wish it would go on forever, but even more, I wish it would stop." Jerry / Cole Porter
" To begin to choose to begin. ." 

People are dancing; on the other side
of here, there
is dancing going
on. We want to send flowers; maybe it's
too late, maybe we've said enough
through Lisa, through Danny, through crocheting, batiking, bullfighting, racing to welcome
each other's departures cruising through exits till it's not a sure thing
if going is coming or to stay.
It's either too abstract or been said before, but
this swirl, this fog is
for now. Soon crossword puzzles come
already filled in, someone else's
car is carrying your plates, you see
your favorite toy in a strange baby's mouth. Something always ends
when another begins. But the endings
are uncertain; you think you're continuing
when someone calls you
by another name and you answer.

 STARK SMITH (contd) :
Danny Lepkoff & Chrystie (Christie) Svane. One by one we collected ourselves towards union, finding
ourselves finally together in Vancouver, B.C., then Seattle, then Eugene and S.F. I hadn't danced with
Danny since we (and others) danced in Rome in the summer of '73. Since then we've both been living
our (separate?) lives; living the dance, dancing the life. And so here we were to physically experience the
product of that time and make it shared & present.
Whereas my contact work in the Bay Area has offered a multitude of insights into the form (contact), my
body was missing the unique and exhilarating sensation of release into awkward, new regions that it had
experienced when first doing contact work. Dancing with Danny, I was forced to abandon a lot of the
common physical & verbal vocabulary relative to contact work that we Bay Area contacters share, and
to just Dance with Danny - contact him - let our bodyminds find their own understanding & work it
out. Awkward & therefore highly attentive to the moment, I found myself listening closer to not only
physical contact cues but spacial coordinates, mutual & exclusive body rhythms - where two are one and one
is two. The latter ( where one is two) is a most uncomfortable (at first) yet exhilarating discovery for
me. I see that for the last year or two I've taken sanctuary in the notion of giving up responsibility for
the dance that was happening, but instead to obey and accept its flow. That allowed me to release my
habitual bossiness a bit - a necessary step towards experiencing subtler points of reference. So that was
that. And this is that, and this; again taking responsibility - in a way that allows for, or rather acknow-
ledges & respects all levels from which direction is initiated - from the personal realm to the universal.
To take responsibility for the dance in the same way that you take responsibility for your life - not more
"Be responsible to your ambiguities." I think Wallace Stevens said that.

SVANE:
"I had my first hit of contact as freshman at Bennington College in 72 from Steve. Ran off to Alaska
with a freight-hopping tree-climbing dare-devil. Rebounded back to Benn. in 74. Found high spirits
playing with Danny & Lisa & 3 others last year. After 4 years of seeing Nancy on tape, finally hooked up
when home this winter in S.F., went north with her, doing her workshops. Danny & Lisa joined us in
Vancouver. So much generosity and information exchanged, extended! Saw Nita, Curt, Margaret Fisher
& Ehmroiel do dynamite concert at Berk. Art Museum, totally inspiring, and Mangrove (5 men) concert
that was a real hit of fluid synapses, and sudden humor. Took a 6X9 room at Reno Hotel (500 room con-
demned S.F. flophouse) with old friend Peggy Burgess, to be part of all-night extravaganza organized by
Ginny Quesada. We did contact on a floor we covered with deep sand, gauze hung for door. A different
reality emanating from each of 30 rooms, a roving audience mob, layered walls of electronic music, extreme
threat of fire breaking out, all created a stimulus overload and a range of shared hysteria. Dancing through
it put me through so many changes that it is left in me as an enormous experience. Danny's room next
door was the most unique. He made contact with passers-by in the hall, and extended himself & his room
simply to their company.
Heading back to Vt. today, can't wait to dance again with Danny & Lisa who are there. A glorious
rainstorm has begun, a beautiful blessing, as the whole west coast has been suffering drought.
Been trying for months to come up with a way of making a family tree, to diagram the contact between
circles of friends. Not sure yet whether 2 dimensions can handle it. If you find a way, send. Seems to in-
volve the skilled vision of a pro pool player, able to visualize the path a ball will take, judging force & angle
at which it's struck. Recurring image of a triangle of balls placed in contact, then bombarded by a single
ball, all flying off in different directions.
After a last dance with Nancy, totally high, I walked away and stopped on a bridge, watching the circles
generated from a duck's stationary treading. As the rings encountered the rings from another duck, they
became rays. Nancy, barely visible, was standing in window of woman who had led her to west coat. I was

waving yellow scarf to serve as my vanishing point in her vision. I had bought the scarf with Nancy up north,
as replacement for a red one Steve had given me upon a departure from the east coast. It all seemed visible
from the bridge, as rings and rays, eventually hitting the bank and rebounding back into the traffic of rip-
ples depending on angle and force with which they hit. The body a tongue for tasting moments.
I'd love to see & show at school what video tapes you've all made. Seems like fine time to add musical
tapes to musical chairs and musical floors.
If you come close, come closer. I don't have a phone, but write and come dance with us.
"Stop unnecessary speculations.
Yo u ' v e made h u n d r e d s of plans
Which never came off
And only led to disappointment.
Unfinished acts are like
The overlapping action of the waves.
Stay alone and stop
Making your own head spin."

Lisa said she didn't have anything to write for this Newsletter so she'd pass it up but I happen to know she
was dancing in Vancouver and Seattle and also that she and Pia Perniciaro and Nancy edited a tape in Eugene
called Coming To Meet - an edit of the tapes Pia took at the Contact Symposium that took place in San
Francisco in December 1975. 

IVANETICH:
Mary was first introduced to contact work in Washington DC in the Fall of 1975, then came out to San
Francisco and took Byron Brown's Christmas Contact Workshop. She is a student at UC Hayward and
decided to do a paper on Contact Improvisation for her Dance History class. Besides the library research
she's done, she arranged interviews with Curt Siddall, Nita Little, Nancy Stark Smith, Byron Brown and
Jerry Zientara, all doing contact work in the Bay Area. When she came to Stinson Beach to talk to me (Nancy)
she showed me a short essay she wrote after seeing one of Mangrove's concerts in January. I encouraged
her to share it with the Newsletter if she wanted to and today received the essay and a letter from her in
the mail..
... I have to say that my history project is growing to proportions far beyond my expectations. As I
transcribe my interviews, I see glaring holes in some of the description, and discrepancies between interviews
about the same performance. Because of these complications and the impending due date, I see this paper
as just a framework which will require much more collaboration for it to grow into a cohesive story of the
development of the form. Anyway, here is the paper about Mangrove. I feel a bit reticent about sharing it;
I guess I'm just not used to the idea of people actually reading what I write. But you've pretty well convinced
me of the communality of contact work, so I offer it in the same spirit

Underlying the beautiful patterns woven by Byron Brown, Aaron Hemmen, John LeFan, Curt Siddall,
and Jim Tyler on Saturday night was an incredible amount of energy. Energy, its sensation, its projection,
its development, its manifestation, simultaneously inspired and moved the dancers. This energy also touched
the audience but differently than in a traditional performance. Usually, in performance a dancer projects
his energy of perfected movement directly to the audience; thus, the audience is trapped, confronted, forced
into visual acceptance. But in contact, the dancers have not perfected specific movements, they have devel-
oped their bodies to handle the widest range of movement and have sensitized themselves to the actual
energy contact which determines the course of their harmonious body phrases. This intense energy contact
occurs directly between the dancers and reaches the audience almost secondarily. Thus, a contact audience
is subtly drawn into the improvisation, and the degree of confrontation is significantly determined by the
audience's capability to empathize. This disintegration of traditional audience and performer roles creates
a new energy environment for the meeting of performers and audience. I am fascinated.